---
layout: post
title:  "Note XI"
subtitle: "Psychedelic Selves"
date: 2020-09-26 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts, notes, clippings]
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
mathjax: true
---

Recently I've been on the search for work engaging with psychedelic experience in a strictly philosophical way. This has proved oddly difficult, despite the resurgence in public enthusiasm for psychedelics. The conversation seems to be dominated by a combination of neuroscientists, psychotherapists, wellness practitioners and Silicon Valley types, who all share an interest in instrumentalising psychedelic experience in the pursuit of some other desiderata, be it psychological health, self-development, or productivity (or often some weird blend of them all). Amongst all this it has been pleasant to discover the work of [Peter Sjöstedt-H](http://www.philosopher.eu/), who stands apart from this crowd in his adoption of a purely philosophical approach to the phenomenology of psychedelic experience.

A [recentish article of his in IAI](https://iai.tv/articles/the-self-unlocked-auid-1497), for example, considers various attempts to pin down the essential characteristics of self, then shows how psychedelic experiences can problematise them. They do this often by inducing states in which the claimed essential characteristic is absent, yet in which something we want to call the self still persists. A central theory he addresses concerns the understanding of the self in terms of _agency_, or the will to act within the world. In this picture the self is seen as constituted by drives, its phenomenological texture what Spinoza called _conatus_, what Heidegger called _sorge_, or what we might just call "giving a shit". Sjöstedt-H points out that many psychedelic experiences (particularly some of the most intense) place one in a state of pure passivity, a total suppression of drive. Yet still a subject of experience remains, suggesting that the self is not exhausted by its drives or the conflicts between them.

This relationship Sjöstedt-H points to between drive, self, and the passive subject has had me thinking, and dovetailed with some thoughts I've had about ketamine experiences. By way of a quasi-response to the article (though these thoughts are probably better described as perpendicular to it), here I want to sketch out some ideas about the self and psychedelic experience in relation to Sjöstedt-H's comments on the cessation of drive, draw some explicit causal links between this and heightened aesthetic experience which will appeal to Bertolt Brecht's theory of theatre, and finally to consider how the dissociative experience induced by ketamine can be considered as an _inversion_ of the process of drive cessation encountered in ego death experiences.

<!--end_excerpt-->

Now, clearly any adequate account of the self will need to recognise that it is a complex structure comprised of perhaps many different components, and that the word "self" may refer to different aspects in different linguistic settings. That said, it does strike me that this point about drive and its attenuation/amplification can provide a way of thinking about the structural relations _between_ those different aspects. If so, psychedelic experiences could provide philosophical insight not just in the negative sense of revealing what's wrong with various theories of the self that try to grant a monopoly to one particular aspect, but, through their temporary distortion of the "self structure" and selective bracketing of its various aspects, can help to illuminate its positive content.

Consider this passage, in which Sjöstedt-H discusses the capacity of psychedelics to induce an experience of transcendence of the values of one's own culture:

> What was once unquestioned now seems arbitrary, and one can become emancipated from lingering morally-induced feelings of guilt, remorse, anxiety, and suchlike. One can lose certain values, but this is not to say that one loses the power of valuation. In fact, one tends to heighten the valuation of many aspects of nature, to such an extent that one may weep for the beauty of a leaf – but one is prone to lose moral haughtiness and umbrage. As such psychedelics can be seen as hazardous to certain social orders that strongly depend on unquestioned dogma.

The attenuation of moral valuation is accompanied by a heightening of the capacity for aesthetic valuation. The link between these is not made explicitly, but we can see the attenuation of drive at play here: the outcome of a moral valuation is an action, whereas the outcome of an aesthetic valuation is an affect.

Borrowing some lingo from Freud, let's call the experience of the transcendence of one's own cultural perspective (or social conditioning) _superego death_. This is the moment at which one no longer experiences cultural values as binding on one's action, but rather as something independent of oneself. Rather than manifesting in consciousness as the background conditions of a space of possible action, those values now enter the foreground as an object of contemplation. It is in this mode of contemplation, in which one steps out of one's particular locale to view the world from a more universal perspective, that they can be seen to be contingent, accidents of birth and history and therefore with no particular claim on one's _obligation_.

Superego death could be thought of as a shift in consciousness from the mode of a participant into the mode of an observer. One advantage of seeing it this way is that it clarifies the link between attenuated drive and heightened aesthesis: when one is immersed in participation the aesthetic mode is simply not available. You can't admire the crocodile's scales when it's coming at you. Both the aesthetic response to the leaf and the incredulous response to the cultural values can then be seen as a certain suspension of participation, in which some portions of the self associated with drive or values are shifted out of the ground of the subject and into the figure of the object.

It's worth bringing in Heidegger here, as it is he who insisted that the subject-object duality is parasitic on the observer-participant duality (and not vice versa). The holding of an object in contemplative consciousness, is, for Heidegger, only possible against a background of framing attitudes which are themselves necessarily withdrawn from consciousness, just as the camera withdraws when one looks into the viewfinder. These are the attitudes he called _sorge_, or care. This framework makes sense of why the adoption of an increasingly universal perspective would correspond to a loss of drive: the figure and ground (or object and subject) of consciousness are formed by an observational attitude made possible by the suspension of participation, a relationship which is now changing: the figure of observation is swelling, impinging on the ground of participation.

In this way we can imagine the psychedelic experience bringing about a narrowing of the "thick" self---the self that includes all the internalised values and drives endowed by one's own socio-historical context. As the narrowing continues one might encounter _ego death_, the flight of drives associated with one's personal ambitions as a temporally extended individual from the ground and into the figure, as one steps further and further out of the space of participation. Continuing to use the Freudian scheme we can then imagine _id death_ occurring, as even fleeting moment to moment whims and impulses disappear. At the limit of this process is the total cessation of all drive, a pure observer---the Husserlian transcendental subject stripped of all normative entanglements. The unmoored point of subjectivity that floats through DMT space, free to see everything because it participates in nothing.

I suspect that picture is going to seem unappealing to those seeking spiritual value in these experiences. Isn't ego death supposed to involve an experience of profound _unity_ with the cosmos? How does this square with a picture that portrays ego death as a state of pure detachment from that very cosmos? This is the point at which I think Brecht has something useful to add. One of Brecht's criticisms of Western theatre was that its insistence on "realism" relies on a sympathetic identification of the audience with the character (in contrast with, for example, [Chinese opera]({{site.baseurl}}/2020/07/07/brecht.html)). Sympathetic identification is when the affects of the audience member mimic those of the character in narrative space, as when one cries or laughs with the person on screen. Brecht emphasised that sympathetic identification is something we can only do when we are detached from the space of participation of the character, i.e. when a fourth wall separates the space of narrative action from the space of observation. When one inhabits a space of participation with another, sympathetic identification makes no sense. If your friend starts crying next to you, you don't start crying yourself---you ask what's wrong. The primary orientation is to _act_ rather than to _feel_. (The moral valuation precedes the aesthetic valuation.)

This notion that detachment can enable identification makes sense of how an experience of absolute detachment could correspond to an experience of universal identification. Only from the view from nowhere can one sympathise with the entire cosmos. According to this line of thought, it is precisely the fact that one is suspended from participation in anything that allows one to experience an identification with everything.

Along with ego death, it is also common to hear deep psychedelic states as accompanied by a "merging of subject and object". The situation I'm describing here is not exactly a breakdown, but rather the asymmetric limit case in which the figure swells so as to completely engulf the ground. That the subject-object distinction still remains in tact is reflected in the fact that the figure still remains _as_ figure---as a space of observation, rather than as a space of participation. While the drive-endowed self of the id, ego or superego belong to the ground of consciousness, the transcendental ego shows up here in the _difference_ between figure and ground, the suspension of participation as condition of observation.

The asymmetry of this situation suggests the possibility of the reverse process, in which the ground swells up to engulf the figure. What might this feel like? Firstly, it would involve a collapse of the observational viewpoint, a kind of plunge into the space of participation. There would be an attenuation of detached contemplation and a heightening of drive as the transcendental ego begins to dissolve into the superego. There would be an amplification of yearning and obligation, a sense of being buffeted about by the winds of destiny. In short, it would be like being swept up in a _drama_ as the fourth wall of subjectivity itself comes crashing down. The loss of the universal perspective would entail a diminishment of one's capacity to sympathetically identify, an experience of objective unity fracturing into one of situated social multiplicity.

This sounds to me like a pretty good description of the ketamine experience. Journeys into k-space often feel less like a modification of the content of consciousness than a kind of shifting and permutation of the _conditions of observation_. Ketamine is the Brechtian psychedelic, a stepping across an unending series of fourth-walls in which the staging apparatus upholding the division of the space of observation from the space of participation is in a constant process of reconfiguration. Without changing significantly in visual appearance, what is one moment an inanimate object may take on normative clothing, suddenly present as a social actor. Space is permeated by a nostalgia indexing the particularities of a history. The experience of music is characteristically one of total narrative submersion. The extreme difficulty of describing the ketamine experience seems to have less to do with the inherent indescribability of its content, but rather with one's total participation in it. It is the difficulty of painting the rattlesnake when you're in the tank with it, similar to the loss of self and memory that accompanies the deep flow states of musicians and atheletes.

So, a hypothesis: the psychedelic experience of ego death associated with DMT (for example), is a total subsumption of the drive-endowed self into the object of the transcendental subject. This is an experience of perfect universality, a subjectivity evinced of all particularity. The dissociative experience exemplified by ketamine is in a sense the inverse: it is the dissolution of the suspended universality of the transcendental subject as it is lost in the radical particularity of participation. These two categories of experience therefore represent two distinct dissolutions of self that move in precisely opposite directions.
