---
layout: post
title: "Phenomenal Properties"
date: 2020-12-16 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: true
---

Here's some follow up thoughts to [my last post]({{site.baseurl}}/2020/12/09/hard-problem.html) on private ostension and its relationship with the hard problem of consciousness. An exchange on Twitter has had me thinking through this issue more carefully, and where it fits within the broader conservation. First I want to talk about the historical shift from framing consciousness in terms of _sense impressions_ to framing it in terms of _phenomenal properties_, then reconsider how the intension/ostension ambiguity plays out in relation to illusionism and its critics, and finally to say something about Ned Block's distinction between phenomenal consciousness and access consciousness, and how it can help to clarify what's at stake in these disagreements.

<br />
_>> from sense impressions to phenomenal properties_

The ascent of phenomenal properties reflects an attempt to respond to problems raised by the broadly Cartesian picture that has historically framed the debate about consciousness. According to this picture our conscious access to the world is mediated by sense impressions: we are not conscious of the tree directly, what we are conscious of is our sense impression _of_ the tree. These sense impressions---special entities belonging to the province of consciousness---are seen to have an idiosyncratic ontology: they exist if and only if they are experienced. This seems to mark them off as non-physical, leading to substance dualism and the problem of mental causation that hounds it.

Framing phenomenality in terms of properties rather than particulars appears to get around this problem. Rather than saying one _has a pain_, we can say instead that one is in a pain state, i.e. a state with phenomenal properties (i.e. there is something it is like to be in that state). This picture no longer requires an ontology of sense particulars: you don't see a sense impression of the tree, you just see the tree---but the state you are in has a phenomenal property, which accounts for the particular feeling of what it is like to see that tree. There is only one ontological type of state, event, or entity (substance monism), but these can have both phenomenal and physical properties (property dualism). Allegedly the problem of mental causation now dissolves, because if there is only one substance then there is no problem of cross-substance interaction.

I've never found this move particularly convincing. While I do agree that the apparatus of mediating sense impressions is full of problems, its replacement with phenomenal properties just reproduces many of the same problems in a different guise. (In [a recent article](https://www.philosophersmag.com/essays/222-the-lure-of-the-cartesian-sideshow) Keith Frankish described this as the replacement of the Cartesian Theatre with the Cartesian Sideshow.) That property dualism recreates the problem of mental causation, for instance, is demonstrated in the dialogue that has surrounded Donald Davidson's [theory of 'anomalous monism']({{site.baseurl}}/assets/pdf/davidson-mental-events.pdf). (The [Stanford entry on mental causation](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-causation/) also has a good account of this.)

Davidson argued that the mind-body problem arises from the apparent contradiction between these three principles:

- some mental events interact causally with physical events
- events related as cause and effect fall under strict laws
- there are no strict laws on the basis of which mental events can be predicted and explained

According to Davidson the apparent contradiction dissolves if mental events _are_ physical events (i.e. if we adopt a token-identity theory---something every substance monist is committed to). The point being that events picked out by mental predicates can be identical to those picked out by physical predicates, even though events described with physical predicates fall under causal laws while the same events described with mental predicates may not. The insight required to make sense of this is that _whether or not events fall under causal laws depends on the vocabulary in which they are described_.

Critics responded that this effectively annuls the causal role of mental properties. Mental events may cause physical events, strictly speaking, but if the above line of thought is right then they do not cause them _in virtue of_ their mental properties---_these_ properties are just causal freeloaders. Insofar as one understands mental predicates to be attributing mental properties, the take home lesson of Davidson's argument seems to be that mental causation is as much a problem for property dualism as it was for substance dualism.

Davidson himself, however, did not necessarily envisage mental predicates as attributing mental properties (in any ontologically committed sense). To pick out an event with a mental predicate could well be to do something other than attribute a property to it, for example to express an attitude towards it. On such an understanding, whether or not mental events cause physical events "in virtue of their mental properties" ceases to be a meaningful question, since the language-game that involves picking out events with mental vocabulary may simply have nothing to do with causal-explanatory practice. (An alternative might be that mental predicates play roles in rational-justificatory practice. On this view, if I say that I moved my arm because I was in pain, I am not _describing the cause of_ my behaviour but _providing a justification for_ it. The confusion arises from conflating reasons with causes.)

<br />
_>> illusionism_

This point seems to mark a significant fault line. The rift emanates from this question: how reasonable is it, _once_ everyone is on more or less the same page about substance monism/token-identity, to deny the existence of phenomenal properties? Illusionists like Frankish and Dennett say that phenomenal properties are not real. Others take this as being a falsehood so obvious as to be ridiculous. [Galen Strawson](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2019/dec/27/galileos-error-by-philip-goff-review):

> There are, to be sure, people who think materialism requires them to deny the existence of consciousness, “illusionists” who are adamant that our brains are machines and there is really no feeling, no pain, no joy, no sensory experience. They are, however, a recent and wildly anomalous group among materialists, and this is unsurprising, because illusionism is the silliest view about reality that has ever been held by any human being. (No one has ever really suffered in any way!) The illusionists sail off the edge of the world in the great Ship of Fools, crewed by Flat Earthers, under the command of Rear Admiral Daniel Dennett, and we must let them go.

This, however, is somewhat uncharitable. Dennett and the illusionists do not deny the existence of events to which phenomenal or sensory predicates can be properly applied (they don't deny that people have pains, for example); they just do not think that interpreting this requires a metaphysics of phenomenal properties. That Strawson takes this to be oxymoronic to the point of parody suggests that he understands 'phenomenal properties' to be defined in such a way that reference is secured---that is, such that there is no question over their existence. Phenomenal properties, to his mind, are things we fix reference to ostensively: not by defining them in terms of other concepts but by first 'having' them and then 'pointing' to them. If true, this it would indeed make illusionism self-defeating.

But this doesn't seem to be the illusionist's claim. What they are denying is the reality of something whose meaning is fixed intensionally, by its definition specified as necessary and sufficient conditions. If we interpret them charitably, we see that they understand phenomenal properties to be properties defined by the intension 'being irreducible and intrinsically contentful' (or something to that effect). Rather than denying the reality of suffering, then, they deny that denying phenomenal properties amounts to denying suffering. This position is _prima facie_ tenable given an intensional definition of phenomenal properties, since the intension cannot secure reference in the same way that an ostensive definition would. As such Strawson and the illusionists seem to mean different things by 'consciousness'. If we are to locate a substantial point of disagreement between them, it must surely lie in their respective views on the _possibility_ of ostensively picking out properties that can then be convincingly argued to instantiate the intension that characterises phenomenality.

Reframing of the issue in terms of phenomenal properties (rather than entities or events) does not seem to amount to any significant progress with respect to this fault line. The intensional/ostensive ambiguity surrounding phenomenal particulars persists with phenomenal properties, albeit in a more mystified form.


<br />
_>> dark phenomenology_

There have been attempts to clarify these issues, such as [the distinction Ned Block makes]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/pdf/block-confusion.pdf) between access consciousness (A-consciousness) and phenomenal consciousness (P-consciousness). A state belongs to A-consciousness if its representation is epistemically available for reasoning, linguistic control, etc ('inferentially promiscuous', in Block's terms). When it comes to defining P-conscious states, however, things are more tricky:

> Let me acknowledge at the outset that I cannot define P-consciousness in any remotely noncircular way. I don't consider this an embarrassment. The history of reductive definitions in philosophy should lead one not to expect a reductive definition of anything. The best one can do for P-consciousness is in some respects worse than for many other concepts, though, because really all one can do is _point_ to the phenomenon.

Block rejects John Searle's version of 'pointing' to P-consciousness (which is basically 'that thing that happens whenever you're not in dreamless sleep, a coma, or dead') as too broad, but proceeds along similar lines by suggesting rough synonyms (what-it's-likeness, etc), and the example of experiential aspects of sensations, feelings, and perceptions. The key point here is that this is an ostensive (and hence reference-securing) way of defining P-consciousness. But in that case, the meaning of P-consciousness contains no information about what P-conscious is (for example, that it is irreducible or intrinsically contentful). The claim that P-conscious states are logically distinguishable from A-conscious states is therefore substantial, and requires justification. When the conceptual cake is cut this way, the illusionist position is that P-conscious states never overflow A-conscious states---that it is A-consciousness all the way down.

(My core point about reference fixing can also be reframed in these terms. One can define P-consciousness ostensively or intensionally---this is a matter of choice. However, if it is defined ostensively then reference is secured but logical independence from A-consciousness is not; if it is defined intensionally then logical independence is secured but reference is not. Many confusions seem to arise from equivocating on these two different senses of 'phenomenal' to give the appearance that P-consciousness can be defined in a way which secures both reference and logical independence from A-consciousness.)

Against the claim that A-consciousness exhausts consciousness Block offers several arguments, examples and thought experiments. For example:

> Here is another reason to believe in P-consciousness without A-consciousness: suppose you are engaged in intense conversation when suddenly at noon you realize that right outside your window there is---and has been for some time---a deafening pneumatic drill digging up the street. You were aware of the noise all along, but only at noon are you consciously aware of it. That is, you were P-conscious of the noise all along, but at noon you are both P-conscious and A-conscious of it.

I like this example, because it illuminates the substantial claims of both illusionists and those who believe that P-consciousness is logically independent of A-consciousness. The illusionists will be forced to disagree with Block's intuitions, and say that there is in fact no consciousness of the drill until the moment one notices it. Others may agree with Block that one was 'aware' of the drill before being 'consciously aware' of it. The illusionist is left with the task of interpreting that on noticing the drill, one might also get the sense that one had been aware of the sound all along. If however we agree with Block that one can be aware (P-conscious) of the drill without being consciously aware (A-conscious) of it, then this seems to invite some counter-intuitive conclusions. Can you be in pain without being consciously aware of being in pain? On this view, is it not logically possible that everyone is in fact constantly in a state of abject pain and suffering, but are simply not aware of it? (See for example David Roden's post on [dark phenomenology and pandemonism](https://enemyindustry.wordpress.com/2020/09/25/dark-panpsychism-philip-goff-and-pandemonism/))
