---
layout: post
title: "Hayek"
date: 2020-12-09 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts, agency, tech, mediation]
published: false
---

> What is the problem we wish to solve when we try to construct a rational economic order? On certain familiar assumptions the answer is simple enough. If we possess all the relevant information, if we can start out from a given system of preferences, and if we command complete knowledge of available means, the problem which remains is purely one of logic. That is, the answer to the question of what is the best use of the available means is implicit in our assumptions.

[The Use of Knowledge in Society]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/pdf/hayek-use-knowledge.pdf), Freidrich von Hayek

This is not the problem faced by modern economics, since knowledge and information is never 'given' to a single mind.

The problem with central planning is that local information can only be made globally available through statistical generalisations which necessarily throw away relevant information.

The price mechanism is a decentralised mechanism which gets relevant local information to relevant people. Uber argues for its surge pricing on such a basis: the price going up in a crisis means it gets more drivers onto the streets where they're needed.

This model will favour those with the most purchasing power, and discriminate against those who cannot afford it. But the Hayekian argument is not that this system is perfect, but that a centrally planned solution will always do a worse job of coordinating action---in this case getting a ride for those who need it.

But why? If it is simply a case of information gathering, then it can solved by technology which is carefully measuring and collating the local conditions (like Project Cybersyn or Red Plenty).

Hayek also points to the computational efficiency of abstraction---each local actor only gets access to the information that is relevant to them to make a decision. The pricing mechanism does not just decentralise information processing---it also containerises it to discreet actors (or preference-bearers). The units that make decisions based on what they know and what they want.

But what are these actors? Are they companies, families, individuals? Hayek's article does not provide an answer to this question, but it does tell us what they _should_ be if we want to maximise information processing: the boundaries of the actors (i.e. the containerisation mechanisms) should be drawn in such a way as to maximise the 'knowledge of particular time and place'. This optimisation flows downwards. Companies are not preference-bearers, but heuristic ways of referring to aggregates of individual preference bearers (otherwise you are losing relevant information). Same with families. In fact one should go further: the true preference bearers are not individual people, but individual time-slices of people. This is the only way to maximise  the incorporation of relevant information.

While Hayek attacks the assumption of the givenness of knowledge, he does not question the given system of preferences assumption. To say that a system of preferences is given is not to say that it does not change (no more than with knowledge), it is to say that there is some fact of the matter about.

In surge pricing, the driver's need for a universal commodity drives "production" (in this case, of a service) without the driver having knowledge of the causes (i.e. other people's suffering). A centrally coordinated state solution would have to gather information about what's going on, and then get that to the relevant people (which includes maintaining information on who the relevant people are.) The information propagation is here provided by Uber.

Distribution of information processing implies a tacit distribution of agency. Information is only recognised by the pricing system if it is incorporated via the exercise of a preference. If someone puts their own preferences on hold for the sake of a larger group entity---a family, say---then they commit the crime of throwing away information. It is central planning on a small scale.

But this shows us that "central planning" can be seen two ways: either as the abstraction from multiple local differences to a single mind, or of the unification of a group under a common norm. Say a family act as a single consumer. The individuals in the family will no doubt have differences of preference which get compromised in the process of forming a group decision. We could say that there will be some unsatisfied needs. But on the other hand clubbing together will allow the family to take advantage of bulk buying, etc. We could say that each member makes a cost-benefit analysis. Viewed this way, the family is just a collection of individuals. However the rationale might have an additional component: family member might derive pleasure sheerly from being in the family---in this sense they have a special preference relating to sharing with these particular people.

The system of preferences is what drives the economic system. It is taken itself to be external to political economy - i.e. that it is not itself produced and consumed.

Let's say we had a socially recognised need---to get all people a car ride in a crisis. To do that we need to both match people in need to a ride. One way is centralised state coordination---find out who is in need, pay for the car ride. Another is to let the market do it (Uber's surge pricing). Both depend on the need of drivers to earn money---this is the action-motivator. But another alternative bypasses both states and markets: solidarity. Drivers might give rides to those in need because they want to, or because they think it's the right thing to do (this is the perspective of social anarchism). However, this third option still faces a knowledge problem: how do individual drivers know who to pick up? In the Uber case, the information is not relayed by the price mechanism itself, but by the intermediary technical platform. One could say that the technology just speeds up what the market would have done eventually. But eventually is irrelevant here, since the state could have worked it out eventually too: speed of information flow is critical. What is critical in Hayek's model is that everyone has a desire for money---this is what allows it to act as medium of information flow between all parts of the system. What if the driver's knew that they were profiting from people's needs? The containerisation is important for efficiency because it abstracts away from particular preference (it would be bad for incorporating local data if people acted on local preference). The value driving production is the universal value---money.

In free markets were really about leaving things alone, then it would make no sense to break up labour unions. Information isolation of labourers is enforced as a norm.

Hayek's argument does not just involve the incorporation of local data by distributing the computation; it also demands the containerisation of individual elements (i.e. so that they are _not_ computing global data). An individual node in this distributed model makes decisions based on their own subjective values and 'knowledge of particular time and place'. For the computation to be distributed, so must preferences. This distribution of preferences is the other facet of containerisation. It is broken when people form together in groups, such as labour unions: local information can't be taken advantage of because local preferences are suspended (e.g. an individual labourer negotiating higher pay based on their particular skills) in the name of group goals. The same argument applies to families, couples, companies, and selves. Any situation in which economic actions are taken as a group are a form of central planning, and therefore throw out local information. 

But the



As Simon DeDeo [puts it](https://youtu.be/i6S_IvWsFwk?t=1392), the market is not just computing economic facts, it is also computing normative facts. [Norm contagion](https://youtu.be/i6S_IvWsFwk?t=3276): to explain long runs of cooperative behaviours, you have to assume that individuals update their preferences as well as their knowledge. (Obvious in colloquial sense: learning something about what a loved one wants can prompt one to update one's own preferences. However our economic models don't tend to take this into account.)
