---
layout: post
title:  "Still Thinking about Burial"
date: 2020-05-02 09:50:00
categories: bit
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
---

It could be said that a sound system is a technology for producing space. It operates by consolidating and autonomising local time, neutralising it through the obliteration of metronomic difference. Rhythm is both a dissolution of temporality and resolution of narrative interiority, a becoming-time of space at its edges. Time is the becoming-extensive of intensive space, the crust that contains and defines it. Leaving the club is always an encounter with temporality experienced as a loss of shared space.  

<!--end_excerpt-->

The fragmentation of rhythm and foregrounding of the medium in Burial’s [music](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7HgjL00s60) conveys temporality as shattered. Mark Fisher [described](http://k-punk.abstractdynamics.org/archives/007666.html) it as a mourning for the lost futurism of rave: “Ravers have become deadbeats, and Burial’s beats are accordingly undead.” But the loss of global temporality can also be considered as a side-effect of the loss of narrative space produced by the sound system in its local cancellation of the present. Burial’s music can be read as striving to reestablish this lost space, a paradoxical attempt to recover the sound system’s collectivising spatiality in the solipsistic locale of headphones. (If Peter Sloterdijk is right that spatial mitosis is an immunological response, then headphones are surely its frontline antibody.)

Fisher emphasised the continuity of Burial with dub’s phono-centric sensibilities, its granting of a “privileged role to voices under erasure.” The denarrativised voice is the source of the undead in Burial’s music, of its spectrality and mourning: the presence of a humanity stripped of agency. But it is not really the beats that are undead, per se. In Burial’s disjointed rhythms there is a different kind of presence, neither dead nor undead, but _inorganic_. Percussive elements are defiantly autonomous, clattering material processes in themselves. Rhythmic unity in Burial operates according to principles of solidarity and contingency, never identity and necessity. Elements are poised to disperse, yet hang together nonetheless. It is this sense of narrative contingency in the inanimate, a certain autonomy in nonhuman matter, that replaces the lost human agency and reestablishes narrative space. The drainage of virtuality from the human sphere is answered by its rediscovery in nonhuman matter. It crystallises in the socialisation of the inanimate, in the yearning of urban debris and the [pathos of machines](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gY8-lC6g0q8).

For Fisher, the slow cancellation of the future testified to a naturalisation of the dyschronia Frederic Jameson [saw](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/40d6/b702fa28fdd1802abfb1210e10f1fa36de42.pdf) as characteristic of the postmodern condition. No longer experienced as jarring or eerie, culture has seen a flattening of the ironic dimension in pastiche and its anachronistic remixing of past forms, which is now presented with the full revolutionary earnest that high modernism reserved for the formally innovative. Irony gestures to the impossibility of an imaginable real; when it is no longer possible to imagine the real anxiety over its absence disappears with it. It is the closure of Baudrillard’s simulatory envelope, final elimination and replacement of the real by its reproduction.

This closure, according to Baudrillard, is always a process of symbolic ambivalence resolving into semiotic transparency, a reduction of a symbol whose referent is hidden and unknown to a sign exhausted by its differential relations to other signs and the reading codes that govern their exchange. This reduction can be understood as an exorcism of unknown virtualities and their replacement by a relational essence, of the substitution of open particulars by closed universals. If there is any possibility of a realism in Baudrillard it lies in the recovery of ambivalence and the antagonism of the hidden.

The inorganic agencies that crowd together in Burial’s rhythms are thick with hidden virtualities and hovering antagonisms. Their frail alliances are always ambivalent in their contingency, and it is because of (not despite) this that the space they inhabit is fundamentally _social_. Empathy is only possible across difference, and solidarity lies in the alignment of purpose between actants that could be doing otherwise. The electricity of [garage](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLXGkz4MstBTIMMK9c26zxLIqMHymBWjw8) lay in its antagonistic yet solidary unification of a single human and a single machine agency. In a landscape haunted by the traces of lost human agency, Burial reclaims narrativity by multiplying antagonisms in the nonhuman.
