---
layout: post
title:  "Capitalist Realism"
date: 2020-05-02 10:43:00
categories: bit
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
---

Here's my thousandish-word summary of Mark Fisher's book _Capitalist Realism_.

TS Eliot first made the point that culture's capacity to produce the new is dependent on its capacity to store and transmit collective memory---innovation depends on the perception of a tradition to innovate against. Capitalism undermines this capacity by destabilising the material conditions of life and through its commodification of cultural products; consequently cultural innovation becomes impossible. Since exchange-value is privileged over use-value, the assignment of value to a cultural product is dependent on its _alienation_, in Marx's sense: the removal from its life-world or social context, from its function and meaning to the individuals and communities who produce and use it and its re-situation within a system of general exchange. This corresponds to a shift in the mode of encounter with cultural products from that of participation to that of spectatorship. Culture ceases to be a participatory forum for shared projects of self-narration, and becomes a factory for the production of aesthetic objects which are consumed in the passive mode.

<!--end_excerpt-->

This is no less true of intellectual and political products, which are increasingly consumed rather than participated in. Anticapitalism becomes something consumable—this itself is an effect of capitalism. The villain of the Hollywood film is now the evil corporation. What this represents is the overvaluing of belief at the price of action: the privileging of exchange-value over use-value in the particular case of the conviction. The role of the conviction as a form of social capital takes precedence over its role as a motivation to act. It becomes more important to perform one’s beliefs than to act on them. Expressing a cynical belief becomes a worse crime than acting cynically. ‘Being negative’ becomes the ultimate faux pas, while acting in a way that is insensitive, unkind, or flaky becomes barely worthy of comment.

Capitalist realism is the name of a pervasive atmosphere which forms the horizon of thought and action. Direct moral criticism is not effective, because it has successfully installed a reality principle according to which it is the best that can be done given the way things are. Any suffering present in the world is not caused by capitalism, but is a necessary part of the world which capitalism will supposedly minimise. To be threatened in this atmosphere capitalism must be challenged on its internal inconsistency. The existence of poverty is not a threat, as the reality principle declares it inherent to human nature. The existence of eco-catastrophe, however, is, as it is a necessary consequence of the infinite growth model inherent to capitalism. Two significant others are the mental health epidemic, which correlates almost perfectly with the spread of capitalism, and bureaucracy, which capitalism is supposed to do away with.

Political action today is muted by reflexive impotence: the sense that although things are bad there is nothing you can do which will make them better. The affective parallel is depressive hedonia: the inability to do anything other than pursue pleasure. The ubiquity of depressive hedonia is an effect of what Deleuze identifies as a shift from the disciplinary systems described by Foucault to even more decentralised, cybernetic forms of power. These societies of control work according to a principle of indefinite postponement, in which the apparatus of surveillance is internalised (the paternal superego is publicly denied at the same time as being internally assimilated). This form of control has the character of addiction—what is indefinitely postponed is satisfaction. Capital deprives us of our apparatus of self-narration, and hence our capacity to either identify with the past or to form visions of the future. The gap it leaves has the character of depressive hedonia, fuelling both the sense of reflexive impotence in the domain of politics, and addiction-shame cycles in the domain of pleasure.

In late capitalism all memory is reduced to formal memory, pure methodology and professionalism (cf. Jason Bourne). Flexibility, and the ability to adapt to new circumstances are valued above all else: anything that ties one down—relationships, the family, nostalgic attachments to particular places—are factors that limit one’s capacity to flourish. The paradox is that the family is increasingly destroyed by capitalism exactly at the moment it becomes critical as a respite from the strains of living with permanent instability. These kind of tensions fuel the boom and bust cycles characteristic of late capitalism. Social systemic causes of mental health like these are difficult to see because mental stress itself has been privatised.

Control societies demand that their subjects express themselves, making affective as well as productive demands on workers. Doublespeak infuses bureaucratic standards: satisfactory grades are not actually satisfactory. These hidden expectations belong to the big Other (a concept of Lacan’s representing the public imagination in its ideological form), and the task of those existing within these structures is to both interpret and satisfy those expectations. This results in the primacy of public relations: that which is consumed by the big Other. The individualism promoted by capitalism amounts to the claim to have dispensed with the big Other, but the opposite is true in practice. One of the mechanisms of Deleuzian control societies is to trick us into identifying our own desires with those of the big Other, while officially the existence of the big Other is denied (no one can tell you what you should want). Cybernetic control circuits such as reality TV take our own present desires and feed them back to us as the desires of the big Other (a point Fisher attributes to Baudrillard).

In a society in which instability is the status quo, the ability to forget carries a premium. Since the Real is unbearable, even unthinkable, consensus reality becomes a tissue of inconsistencies. What counts as sane in this situation is the capacity to accept the incommensurable without question, as the dreamer does. This loss in narrative memory gives way to an emphasis on formal memory, or memory through methodology. At the level of culture this plays out as a reliance on familiar forms while the rapidity of change in content actually increases. The inability to create memories leads to an over reliance on established forms, and hence a stagnation in innovation.

Big Government serves as a bugbear to be blamed for its failure to act as a centralising power, precisely because of the centerlessness of global capitalism. It is not possible to vent anger anywhere else. The center is missing, yet we cannot stop searching for it. It presents a false dichotomy between centralised collective responsibility and individual responsibility, when the unthinkable truth is that responsibility lies with a diffuse impersonal structure.

Neoliberalism is characterised by the equation of self-interest with virtue: being happy is a moral duty. In tandem with the loss of becoming, self-interest collapses into fulfilment of presently accessible desire. Anyone with a pretence to occupy the position of the paternal superego is treated with mockery. Yet there is an awareness that this position is required—people know that fulfilling present desire undermines the capacity to fulfil deeper desires later. The problem is that at any given moment we may not know what what those future deeper desires are. And because we do not always (perhaps often) do not know what we want, some of our most profound desires are exploratory: desires for the strange and unfamiliar. What is in the process of being lost is the production of culture which provides this.
