---
layout: post
title: ""
date: 2021-01-21 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: false
---

I've been browsing through the archives of the newly reanimated Slate Star Codex, and came across [a post reviewing](https://slatestarcodex.com/2017/11/30/book-review-inadequate-equilibria/) Eliezer Yudkowsky's book Inadequate Equilibria. I've not read the book, but what I found interesting in Scott Alexander's summary that it is an examination of ways that markets can lead to undesirable equilibria, written by someone who broadly believes in the benevolence of the Invisible Hand. As Alexander says, the book is fundamentally a work of theodicy---an attempt to understand how evil can arise in a world created by a loving God.

Yudkowsky identifies three categories of fail modes for the Invisible Hand:

> 1. Cases where the decision lies in the hands of people who would gain little personally, or lose out personally, if they did what was necessary to help someone else;
>
> 2. Cases where decision-makers can’t reliably learn the information they need to make decisions, even though someone else has that information
>
> 3. Systems that are broken in multiple places so that no one actor can make them better, even though, in principle, some magically coordinated action could move to a new stable state.

The third of these is the category I found most interesting, as it seems to overlap with some Marxist modes of analysis. As Alexander writes, these situations are bad Nash Equilibria:

> Everyone hates Facebook. It records all your private data, it screws with the order of your timeline, it works to be as addictive and time-wasting as possible. So why don’t we just stop using Facebook? More to the point, why doesn’t some entrepreneur create a much better social network which doesn’t do any of those things, and then we all switch to her site, and she becomes really rich, and we’re all happy?

> The obvious answer: all our friends are on Facebook. We want to be where our friends are. None of us expect our friends to leave, so we all stay. Even if every single one of our friends hated Facebook, none of us would have common knowledge that we would all leave at once; it’s hard to organize a mass exodus. Something like an assurance contract might help, but those are pretty hard to organize. And even a few people who genuinely like Facebook and are really loud about it could ruin that for everybody. In the end, we all know we all hate Facebook and we all know we’re all going to keep using it.

Another example he gives is Uber:

> Or: instead of one undifferentiated mass of people, you have two masses of people, each working off the other’s decision. Suppose there was no such thing as Lyft – it was Uber or take the bus. And suppose we got tired of this and wanted to invent Lyft. Could we do it at this late stage? Maybe not. The best part of Uber for passengers is that there’s almost always a driver within a few minutes of you. And the best part of Uber for drivers is that there’s almost always a passenger within a few minute of you. So you, the entrepreneur trying to start Lyft in AD 2017, hire twenty drivers. That means maybe passengers will get a driver…within an hour…if they’re lucky? So no passenger will ever switch to Lyft, and that means your twenty drivers will get bored and give up.

If you wanted to acknowledge these scenarios as representing inadequate equilibria while defending market capitalism in general, then you need to maintain that they are rare, accidental, or involve some kind of distortion of market operations. Fixing this category of problems would then just be a question of becoming _better_ at capitalism.

Against this, a general anti-capitalist point could be made by arguing that these scenarios are ubiquitous, intentional, or in some way necessitated by the internal logic of capitalism. Actually, I don't think it would too much of a stretch to summarise  Marx's central claim as "capitalism optimises for bad Nash Equilibria." The details of this argument can be made at two levels, which correspond to what Anselm Jappe [has called](http://www.thehobgoblin.co.uk/journal/2008_4_KL_Jappe.htm) the exoteric and the esoteric Marx.

_>> The Exoteric Argument__

The exoteric argument begins with the observation that Nash equilibria like those in the examples can themselves be exploited for profits. So once most people are on Facebook the execs will know that their user base is self-maintaining, and they no longer have a financial incentive to provide a platform that anyone actually likes. In fact, since they can almost certainly profit by producing a worse user experience (more ads, nudging, sneaky attention capturing mechanisms) without losing users, they have good reasons to do exactly that. Even if Facebook was founded with the best of intentions (as it no doubt was), once it achieves a certain critical mass an incentive forms that works against those intentions. This may go some way to explaining the theatre of Silicon valley entrepreneurs agonising over whether they have become evil or not.

In contrast, Uber have pretty much always been straightforwardly evil and proud of it. They represent a more virulent form of the same pattern. If you know that a Nash equilibrium can be exploited, then as long as you have enough start-up capital you can make it part of your business plan to create one. Uber are good examples of this, deliberately operating at a loss to undercut local competition and mop up the market share. Once a new equilibrium has been produced, they are free to exploit it as they like.

There's a couple of responses that can be made to this argument. The first is that it is sensitive to extra-economic factors like Reason and Virtue. Mark Zuckerberg's sincere goal might well be to act in accordance with Virtue, but if he believes in the naïve, pre-Yudkowskian benevolence of the Invisible Hand then Reason will be telling him that the best way to satisfy Virtue is to obey the profit principle. If he has read _Inadequate Equilibria_, however, then he will know that he's faced with an Invisible Hand fail mode, and Reason will be warning him that profit is not a good guide to Virtue in this case. In short, these kind of problems can be avoided by individual producers becoming smarter.

What about in the Uber scenario, where Reason is acting purely on the profit principle, and is in the service of no further social Virtue? (I have no idea whether this is actually the case---the Uber founders may well just be hardcore free-marketeers who believe the Invisible Hand always optimises for Virtue and has no fail modes. However the line between Reason and Virtue is blurry, and right now this pantomime needs a villain.) In this situation the solution is smarter consumers---by understanding the Invisible Hand's fail modes better, they can see Uber's strategy for what it is from the beginning and choose not to use it. By cultivating their Reason, consumers will better be able to understand that short-term benefits in price and convenience can function as traps leading to long-term misalignments of Virtue.

A second response is that this argument only applies in situations where our wanting something is irreducibly dependent on what everyone else is doing or wanting. This might be the case for social networks, but it probably is not the case for other things, like hammers and nails. The extent to which this argument applies to capitalism in general is then a question of what kind of wants conform to dependency patterns like this. If you're buying some clothes as a social status marker, then the value you place in them presumably depends on your perception of other people's desire for these clothes---or possibly that certain other people very much do _not_ desire these clothes. How much do consumption patterns in general reflect our independent wants as individuals, and how much do they reflect dependent, socially mediated wants? If the most of what we label "the economy" is about satisfying independent wants then the exoteric argument applies only to its edge cases.

_>> The Esoteric Argument_

Now, what Jappe terms the esoteric Marx is his critique of the dual nature of commodities and the value-form (the notoriously baffling bit at the beginning of Capital). Rather than get into that, here I'm just going to think a bit about what an esoteric argument looks like in relation to these examples, how it contrasts with the exoteric argument, and what this tells us about the rationalist market theodicy of Yudkowsky.

The responses to the exoteric argument made appeals to three things: the Virtuous producer, the Informed consumer, and---beneath both of these---the desiring individual.
