---
layout: post
title: "Brandom Bits Unused"
date: 2021-06-10 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: false
---

## Agency

On the lacuna in the modern conception of agency:

> For in spite of the distinctively modern acknowledgement of a "right of knowledge" or "right of intention," alerting the burglar or buying a bond of an incipiently bankrupt company are things I genuinely _do_, albeit unintentionally. They are not just accidents, or things that happen to me. That notion of doing involves _some_ sort of responsibility. Yet it seems on the face of it that it is a _different_ sort of responsibility from that associated with what I did intentionally. What, exactly, is the relation between the acknowledgement of responsibility articulated in agent-privileged intentional descriptions and the attribution of responsibility articulated in audience-privileged consequential descriptions? [p398]

## Experience and Representation

Normative definition of representation:

> In taking it that acknowledging the _incompatibility_ of one's commitments obliges one to _change_ them, one is taking how things are _for_ one to answer to a standard of how they are _in_ themselves. That _is_ taking them to be about something, to be appearances of a reality, phenomena presenting some noumena, senses presenting referents, in short, ways things are _for_ a subject, rather than _merely_ states _of_ a subject. [p434]

On experience:

> So for Hegel, not only is experience a _process_ rather than a punctiform _event_, but it essentially involves a _doing_, the exercise of practical agency. Recollecting is an essential phase of such doings. This is the explanatory primacy of the practical: cognition is modeled on intentional agency. Experience necessarily involves _reflection_ on and recollection of one's concepts and commitments---an active taking of responsibility for them and exercise of authority over them, identifying with some by sacrificing others, and a recollective vindication of those decisions as norm-governed. That conception of experience as based on an active process of reflection and recollection is as far removed as it could be from spectator models, where the only necessary reflection is a passive mirroring relation. Those choices and endorsements, normative identifications and sacrifices, and their subsequent recollective vindication are phases of the ongoing experiential process by which one the one hand self-conscious individual _selves_ are determined, and on the other the subjective constellations of concepts-and-commitments, how things are for the subject, is further determined by incorporating aspects of how things are in themselves. [p445]

## Language

On language as the dasein of Geist:



> The fact is that when you speak a language, you get the capacity to formulate an indefinite number of novel claims, and so to entertain an indefinite number of novel intentions, plans, and conjectures. That is a kind of positive freedom to make and entertain novel claims, things that could be true, or things one could commit oneself to making true. One gets this explosion of positive freedom, though, only by constraining oneself by linguistic norms---the norms one must acknowledge in practice as binding in order to be speaking some particular language. However open textured those norms may be, they involve genuine constraint. If one does not sufficiently respect the linguistic norms, then one ends up not saying, or thinking, anything at all. Of course, one need not say anything. One could just not ever say anything, though at the cost, as Sellars says, of having nothing to say. But the only way one can buy this positive, expressive freedom is by paying a price in negative freedom. One must constrain oneself by linguistic and conceptual norms. When one is speaking one's own language and not using fancy vocabulary, that constraint becomes invisible. It becomes much more visible when speaking in a language in which one is not fluent. The point here is that the way in which the language one does constrain oneself by becomes the medium in which one's _self_ not only expresses, but develops itself is a paradigm of central importance for Hegel. [p520-521]

Strategic alliance:

> Reciprocal confession is not yet the achievement of absolute Spirit [...], however, so long as what is achieved is just reciprocal _Niederträchtigkeit_. Having a whole community of knowers and agents symmetrically and even-handedly playing the moral valet to each other [...] does not yet abolish alienation, but only raises it to the level of universality. For norms are still invisible. And because they are, so are attitudes as _normative_ attitudes. What people are doing is not intelligible as acknowledging and attributing commitments, binding oneself and taking others to be bound by norms. So the reciprocal _niederträchtig_ recognitive attitudes are not intelligible as _normative_ attitudes either, but only as natural states of individuals (inclinations, dispositions), causally brought about by and bringing about other such states. From this point of view, the performances individuals produce cannot properly be seen as intentional doings or claims to knowledge, nor the individuals as agents or knowers, hence not really as self-conscious selves. What they are for themselves is accordingly not yet what they are in themselves. [p596]

> The issue here concerns the practical conception of the pragmatic notion of normative _force_. How should norms (what is or is not appropriate, correct, obligatory, or permissible) or normative statuses (responsibility, authority, commitment, or entitlement), on the one hand, be understood as related to normative attitudes (_taking_ performances to be appropriate, correct, obligatory, or permissible, _acknowledging_ or _attributing_ responsibility, authority, commitment, or entitlement), on the other? The traditional, premodern view saw norms as independent and attitudes as dependent. The objective norms have authority over the subjective attitudes of individuals, which are supposed merely to reflect them, acknowledge their authority, apply them in deliberation and assessment, judgement and action. The modern view sees attitudes as independent, and norms as dependent. The subjective attitudes individuals adopt _institute_ norms. That is why when the commitments characteristic of modernity are made explicit, they can take the metalevel form of _utility_. For _usefulness_ comprises properties that simply reflect the relation of an object to particular human purposes. [p554]

> But formal reciprocity recognition [i.e. the actually existing structure] does not _guarantee_ and cannot _establish_ such a system of norms. For the determinate contenfulness of conceptual (reason articulating) norms depends on incorporating matter-of-factual contingency in the form of normative necessity: acknowledging the authority of particulars over universals, as well as the converse. Friction, individuals finding themselves subject to the competing demands of materially incompatible norms, is [] the price of determinateness of normative content[.] [p480]

> This framework leads Kant to distinguish between the realm of nature and the realm of freedom in normative terms. To be _free_ in his sense is to be bound by norms, to be able to perform intentional actions and make judgements, which is to say to be able to undertake commitments. That is to be able (in the normative sense of having the authority) to make oneself responsible in the ways articulated by concepts, which are rules for determining what one has committed oneself to---for instance, by calling the pen "copper." One of the radical features of this normative conception of freedom as constraint by norms is that it is a conception of _positive_, rather than _negative_, freedom. Negative freedom is freedom _from_ something: the absence of some sort of constraint. Positive freedom is freedom _to_ do something: the presence of some sort of ability. In Kant's picture of the freedom characteristic of _geistig_, normative beings, the capacity that they have to commit themselves, to undertake responsibilities, is of a kind of positive freedom. They are able to do something that merely natural creatures cannot. Freedom for Kant is the capacity to constrain oneself normatively, by undertaking commitments and responsibilities, acknowledging authority, and so on. [p518]
