---
layout: post
title: "On Dialectical Pragmatics"
date: 2021-03-11 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: false
---

In [my last post](https://samuelludford.medium.com/against-metamodernism-51be3cbbe751) I was being all down on metamodernism, though I'm happy to say it has provoked some fruitful discussion. In this one I'd like to begin the task of turning those critical threads in some more constructive directions, beginning with questions of epistemology, discourse, and consensus, and their implications for collective agency in the world as we find it.  

The criticism I developed in Against Metamodernism took aim at the multi-perspectivalism often adopted as an epistemological framework by politically motivated strands of metamodernism (whether explicitly, or implicitly via the motif of oscillation). I argued that this framework is unable to facilitate synthesis across divergent views because it is unable to register productive tensions between them. Here I want to consider a different approach, one which restores perspectival tension to its proper place, and which I believe is much better placed to illuminate the processes underlying synthetic discourse and robust consensus.

At the heart of this approach is the concept of _mutual recognition_. This idea has its origins in Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, in a line of argument from the Self-Consciousness chapters sometimes referred to as the "dialectics of recognition". I'll be drawing on an interpretation given by Robert Brandom in [his recent book](https://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674976818) on the Phenomenology---that said, my goals here are practical rather than scholarly, and I'll make no particular efforts at exegesis or close referencing. Neither Hegel nor Brandom will be mentioned again in the main body of this post. As I hope will become apparent, far from being an obscure piece of philosophical arcana mutual recognition is something already familiar to all of us.

The segue to mutual recognition begins with the observation that multi-perspectivalism is an answer to the wrong question. It is as if the multi-perspectivalist sees a dysfunctional public conversation and, determined to be the change they want to see in the world, responds by attempting to simulate the ideal conversation in their own head. But to make this move is to have already done something rather weird---it is to have treated the problem as if it were a _one-subject_ problem. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this path nearly always ends up at the doors of non-classical logic and/or revisionary theories of truth. There is no doubt some value to this approach, but is this really the problem we need to solve? I think what we want to know is how to have _good conversations_---public ones in particular. If we understand this, perhaps we'll also understand why this seems to be so difficult at the moment. Point is that this is a _multi-subject_ problem. There are no particular reasons to believe that it will require of individuals anything more exotic than the capacity to change their mind.

To insist on treating this as a multi-subject problem is to move primary focus away from the logical relationships between beliefs, and onto the _social_ relationships between people in discursive contexts. In philosophical terms, this is to shift the register from epistemology to normative pragmatics. The aim in bringing mutual recognition to the fore is to provide a way of thinking about dialogue by thinking about the interpersonal relationships that underpin it. Mutual recognition is concerned with questions like: what even _is_ discursive space? The value of pursuing questions like these is that their answers can tell us how these spaces become dysfunctional.

Developing this account will provide what I hope is a somewhat different diagnosis of why public conversations commonly fail, and how they might succeed. In later sections I'll apply these ideas to the technically mediated spaces in which public life is increasingly staged. I'll argue that the value systems built into many of these spaces are fundamentally incapable of supporting the kind of interpersonal relations required by productive discourse, and therefore radically undermine it. This line of thought suggests that failures of public conversation have more to do with deficiencies in the underlying social technology than deficiencies in the individuals who use them. This thought will lead to some general suggestions of how to rebuild the conditions of collective agency.


<br />
_>> Mutual Recognition_

To recognise someone is to treat them in a certain way: it is to acknowledge their authority to place demands on you. To recognise is to _do_ something, not to feel or believe something---it is a gesture made through concrete actions. When it is said that a true friend will let you know when you're being an asshole, this expresses a recognitive sentiment. But recognition need not imply closeness. When you wander out of the desert looking haggard and the townsfolk provide you with meal and water but keep a wary distance, this is also recognition.

Broadly speaking, to recognise someone is to acknowledge their presence in a shared social space. When the space is discursive, this means acknowledging the authority of your interlocutor to hold you accountable to the commitments you have taken upon yourself. To make a claim is to take on an epistemic commitment; to recognise the other is to acknowledge their authority to request justifications for your claims. This acknowledgement can be made by performing certain actions, for instance by responding in good faith. Conversely, recognition can be withheld by ignoring the request, or by being all sneaky and evasive.

_Mutual_ recognition is when two people recognise one another, symmetrically and non-hierarchically. This is an interpersonal structure in which authority is always matched by a corresponding responsibility. In a relationship structured by mutual recognition, one's authority to hold the other to account is inseparable from one's responsibility to answer to one's own commitments in turn.

There is a sense in which mutual recognition always contains a dimension of _sacrifice_, or at least a commitment to potential sacrifice---by acknowledging the other's authority to make demands of you, you acknowledge that your own self-interest may sometimes be overridden.

This is made vivid by extreme cases, in which mutual recognition can take the form of a ritualised conflict. One example is the medieval institution of the duel. Part of what it meant to be a member of the nobility was to acknowledge the right of others nobles to challenge you to a duel. A peasant could not challenge a noble---if they did the noble would have no obligation to accept (and indeed it would bring them dishonour). But to refuse a challenge from another noble was unthinkable---it would be to disavow one's identity with the nobility. To refuse the challenge would be to _make_ it the case that not only were you no longer was a noble, but that you never had been. Mutual recognition here takes the form of an honour code in which individuals bind themselves (via their practical acknowledgement of a duty to honour their opponent's challenge) to courses of action that may diverge wildly from their material self-interest, even to the point of death.

<br />
_>> Conversation and Consensus_

What does mutual recognition have to do with consensus process? I'll start by considering the banal example of a group of friends deciding on a restaurant. The benefits of this are twofold---the simplicity of the situation helps to illustrate the dynamics in question clearly, and also to anchor mutual recognition in everyday experience.

Consider two ways in which this decision process can fail:

1. Everyone has their own unshakeably strong preference about where to eat and won't budge. Deliberation gets nowhere, because no-one is willing to take other people's preferences into account.

2. No-one voices any preferences at all. Everyone just ends up hanging around waiting for someone else to make a decision for them, and the conversation never even gets off the ground.

These two failures of group decision making correspond to what in other contexts are sometimes called "reductive individualism" and "reductive collectivism," respectively. In terms of recognition, what is at issue is the authority group members grant to one another's preferences to shape group action. In the case of reductive individualism, members claim authority for their own preferences without recognising it in others. In the case of reductive collectivism, members refuse to recognise their own constitutive role in the group process, effectively shrugging off both the authority and responsibility of decision making.

As we know from experience, the decision process works perfectly well when group members adopt a symmetric authority structure---each _both_ shouldering some of the decision labour by providing input preferences _and_ taking the preferences of others into account (in practice by revising or suspending their own as dialogue unfolds). Once these conditions are met, the deliberation can quickly converge on a consensus. Even in this simple example we begin to see how mutual recognition charts a middle path between the twin inertias of reductive individualism and reductive collectivism.

In the case of general dialogue the situation is somewhat more complicated. In a discursive context, mutual recognition is established when you both actively hold your interlocutor to (what you take to be) their epistemic commitments and practically acknowledging their authority to hold you to your own. A common phrase which captures this whole package is "charitable interpretation."

In a good dialogue there are rarely any gotcha moments or major u-turns. Mostly it revolves around reciprocal interpretation---while there may be concessions and revisions, these are typically small and peripheral. In practice, exercising the principle of charity means performing interpretive labour to maximise the coherence of an interlocutor's position with one's own. This is to progressively attribute and revise auxiliary beliefs and interpretive hypotheses so as to maximise the distribution of truth over the core commitments of both views. Successful dialogue is primarily a process of creative interpretation---when it converges on agreement it does not simply converge on a _new_ agreement, but often on the sense that agreement had _been there all along_, albeit it in latent form.

It's worth contrasting this with the recommendations made by multi-perspectivalism. On this view, when confronted with a perspective incommensurable with your own, you should suspend commitment to your own position in order to temporarily inhabit that of the other. While this may seem inclusive on its surface, on closer inspection it seems to bypass interpretive labour. You can only inhabit the other's position if you already know what they mean, and interpretation is only possible against a constellation of background beliefs. In claiming to be suspending their own beliefs to inhabit those of the other, the multi-perspectivalist in fact _masks_ their own beliefs---specifically, those implicit in their interpretation of the other. But this is to make them unavailable for challenge, and this is to fail to recognise them (it is to fail to acknowledge their authority to tell _you_ what _they_ mean). Despite its egalitarian pretences, multi-perspectivalism betrays a subtle imperialism in its tacit monopolisation of the authority of interpretation.

<br />
_>> Failures of Recognition_

There are many aspects of life which we tend to think of in terms of feelings, but which can be also be looked at through the lens of recognition. To do so is to shift the register from _personal_ state to _interpersonal_ function. For example, anger implies recognition. It only makes sense to be angry at someone you recognise, someone with whom you share social space---in this sense, anger is often a demand for recognition in return. In contrast, to hold someone in contempt is to withdraw one's recognition for them. You know the phrase, haters gonna hate? The sentiment expressed by this is something like: you have no obligation to respond to other people's anger (or resentment). While there are no doubt legit applications of this, read as a piece of generalised social know-how it starts to look more like: don't respond to anger with anger, respond to anger with contempt. From the point of view of mutual recognition, this doesn't look like much of an improvement. What it looks like is a recommendation to shear interpersonal space in half to dodge the labour of maintaining it.

It is often said that we have lost our connection with nature. This seems undeniable, but what is odd is that it is often interpreted in an affective or aesthetic pitch, as if the problem is that we no longer have the right feelings when we look at trees. This kind of interpretation suggests the solution lies in the cultivation of internal states, in self-development as response to a spiritual deficit. But if we interpret "connection" in terms of recognition, internal states start to seem far less relevant. From this perspective, what we have lost is our collective ability to acknowledge relations of reciprocal _obligation_ with the natural world---with all the tensions, annoyances and antagonisms that come with them. Odysseus raging at Poseidon may be a more appropriate image than the Bodhisattva meditating in front of the lotus tree.

As we have seen, mutual recognition can break down in two ways: either someone tries to exercise authority without acknowledging the corresponding responsibility, or they disavow authority altogether. Arguing in bad faith is an example of the first---criticising (authority) without charity (responsibility). An example of the second is when, on being confronted about something they have done wrong, the accused replies "oh yes I know I did that I'm such an awful person I guess I'm just like that" but never actually apologises in any meaningful way.  Broadly speaking, a failure of recognition corresponds to some version of what we typically think of as objectification. In the first kind of failure one implicitly objectifies the other; in the second one objectifies oneself---both are ways of evading the social labour demanded by mutual recognition.

This brings us to a third failure of mutual recognition, one which will have special relevance in what follows. This structure is _strategic alliance_---other names for it could be "you scratch my back I'll scratch yours" or "mutual objectification." I am referring of course to contractually structured reciprocal self-interest. The important thing about this is that it is similar to mutual recognition in certain aspects: as a symmetric structure it is non-hierarchical, and it involves a certain bi-directional attribution of authority. But the nature of this "authority" differs. Whereas in mutual recognition the authority structure is unconditional (the authority I grant you is not conditional on its alignment with my self-interest), in strategic alliance it is not. In this case, my acknowledgement of your authority to shape my action is conditional on my judging that it will provide me with extractable value.

Returning to the restaurant example, strategic alliance is like if everyone is trying to decide on a restaurant not because they are friends and want to have dinner together, but because they all want a chic Instagram photo which will show they were out having dinner with friends. This kind of motivation structure is perfectly capable of producing consensus---in fact it often makes it easier, because working out what restaurant looks disposably good as an Instagram backdrop is easier than navigating real relationships. And if it turns out it isn't, no matter---you don't have social ties to these people so you can always just exit the situation and go attach yourself to another Instagram dinner club, or whatever this horrorshow is. I am no doubt labouring this point---we all know the difference between mutual recognition and strategic alliance: it is just the difference between a social tie and a professional tie.

<br />
_>> The Pragmatics of Strategic Alliance_

Mutual recognition and strategic alliance are often conflated, but there are critical differences in their implications for social reasoning and cooperative action. If I understand myself to be in strategic alliance with someone else, then I know they will join me in cooperative action only to the extent that they judge their self-interest will be served in doing so. This knowledge has objective significance for my own reasoning about how much risk and labour to front.

This becomes extremely important in situations where cooperative action is both high cost and high stakes, for example in a group's struggle against a malignant status quo, or in collective response to existential threat. What is often a stark cost-benefit analysis when viewed at a collective level is plagued by indeterminacy when approached from the perspective of individual investment and value extraction. This makes it extremely difficult for a decision process grounded on strategic alliance to reach a stable, action-guiding consensus in these scenarios. This problem does not arise when the process is grounded on mutual recognition, because the unconditional structure of authority means the decision process is a _group_ decision process, full stop---i.e. the collective deliberation is not being funnelled through a second layer in which individuals deliberate about how much value they can personally extract from the collective action.

The distinction can be made explicit in game theoretic terms: two people in a relationship of strategic alliance will always defect in a prisoner's dilemma, while those in mutual recognition will cooperate. A strategic alliance always involves distinct self-interested agents whose preferences may happen to be in alignment---one of the most important lessons we have learned from game theory is that this is insufficient to secure cooperation in a wide class of collective action problems, _even when it is in everyone's self-interest to cooperate_. In practice, what this means is that in many cases it can at best produce an unstable consensus, one which may inflate quickly (due to relatively low initial buy in) but is liable to burst, much like a speculative bubble.

Mutual recognition requires something else, namely that participating individuals acknowledge the authority of the consensus to override their self-interest. It is this feature which allows a recognitive community to operate as a _single_ agent. A consensus underpinned by mutual recognition requires more initial labour from individuals, because it must first produce the social space in which the deliberation occurs. This may make it slower to form, but in the end it will be much more robust, since it does not hang together on the basis of a speculative gamble. Over the long-term, these are really the only processes that can generate robust consensus. In other words, mutual recognition is the interpersonal basis of real collective agency.

There's a standard Marxist line of argument which can be rephrased in these terms. It goes like this. The primary effect of the capitalist mode of production is the gradual replacement of social ties based on mutual recognition with professional ties based on strategic alliance. Since social ties require considerably more labour to produce, this process is exothermic: turning all that socially locked-in labour into extractable value effectively releases it as energy, making it available for redirection into commodity production. This results in a huge increase in both material wealth and social alienation. A further effect of the alienation is the emergence of entirely new kinds of consumer demand which drive even more commodity production, locking the whole process onto an accelerating loop.

Whether or not one agrees with Marxists about its origins, it is undeniable that the replacement of bonds based on mutual recognition with those based on strategic alliance is a feature of technological modernity. When people talk about "the professionalisation of friendship," this is what they mean. The tendency of online dating towards transactional encounters is an obvious example, as are the myriad other ways in which social existence has been gamified, not to mention the marketisation of literally everything. In a certain sense all of this can be quite liberating---the things they provide have many surface similarities to the things they replace, and they remove much of the social labour and lingering obligation. On the downside they can be fleeting, ephemeral and unstable. But when all of your spare energy has always already been absorbed by the daily grind, perhaps that's not such a bad deal?


<br />
_>> The Technical Mediation of Recognition_

I've outlined two symmetrical interpersonal structures and how they facilitate or inhibit the production of collective will. Mutual recognition is required for robust group reasoning, but is costly in social labour. Strategic alliance is seductive in that it provides a way to cheaply and rapidly bind something like collective will, but which is ultimately too fragile to follow through on anything that involves working against the existing grain---for instance political struggle or systems change. With these ideas in place, it becomes possible to give a diagnosis of contemporary inertia which does not depend on positing a failure of the general population. This is that _mutual recognition is rendered impossible by the constraints of the contemporary public sphere_.

The contention here is that the _formal architecture_ of our public spaces fundamentally undercuts collective agency. It does this by nudging all sincere attempts to establish mutual recognition towards strategic alliance. As individuals trying to communicate within this space we experience this as a kind of devil's bargain: the only way to become visible is by adopting social practices which take the form of strategic alliance. To get yourself into public view you have to subject yourself to some process of professionalisation or storification. But this makes it very difficult for anyone to relate to you as anything other than a professional or a story. What gets lost in this is the possibility of _solidarity_.

But how might a communications medium systematically undermine mutual recognition? Surely the way people treat each other is up to them? The key to understanding this point is the realisation that our ability to establish a space built on mutual recognition depends critically on our ability to send credible signals of intent to one another. It is not enough that I recognise you and you recognise me---I also need to know that you recognise me, to know that you know that I recognise you, to know that you know that I know that you recognise me, and so on. In a physical conversation, all this can be established by as little as eye contact. This makes a withdrawal of recognition very obvious. To return to an earlier example, I can withdraw my recognition for someone who is asking me to justify my claim by ignoring them. Doing this in a physical context is very difficult---I'd probably just get called out, or at least feel the full force of a social norm (not responding in physical space is something that has to be done actively).

But on a social media platform (for example) I am nearly always covered by plausible deniability. This is partly due to the privilege often given to the present on the timeline---timeline based apps retain no meaningful sense of public memory, with content fading rapidly into an indeterminate past. Individuals may remember, but in the absence of any way of stably representing it publicly the memory never enters common knowledge, and this is sufficient for past commitments to be ignored with plausible deniability. The problem with a systemic presence of plausible deniability is not that it makes me more likely to exercise it, but that my knowledge that other people _could_ exercise it makes it more difficult for me to interpret _anyone's_ signals as credible. This introduces a kind of noise into the signalling system which is completely independent of anyone's intentions.

There are many technical features of social media platforms which produce these kind of effects. One is the way their reward systems tend to ensure that all publicity is good publicity. The only real currency on social media is visibility, and this can be achieved equally well by pissing people off as by making them happy (not least because publicly pissing one person off is sure to make someone else happy).  This incentivises bad faith engagement---knowing this incentive structure is in place makes it harder for me to identify good faith engagement as such, i.e. as a credible signal of recognition. Most subtly (and I think most importantly), when someone engages _positively_ with something I've posted---by sharing it, for instance---I can never quite be sure whether this is a sign of genuine recognition, or whether that person is simply appropriating it for aggregation into their own story. I cannot tell whether they are engaging with it or wearing it. I will probably respond positively in return anyway because, well, I want people to engage with it. But then, assuming the original intention was totally sincere, this person at the other end of the interaction is now in the mirror situation with respect to me. It is intrinsically difficult for us to take each other's recognitive signals as credible, and this is nudging us into strategic alliance.

Social media provides vivid examples of this phenomenon, but by no means marks the extent of it. These effects are familiar across the public sphere---in news media, politics, publishing, the art world, podcast culture, and so on. We are never talking about a single technology, always whole ecosystems of platforms and institutions. What is important is the way the ecosystem implements its norms of value aggregation. These norms implicitly materialise different structures of interpersonal authority, not by acting on the attitudes of individuals directly, but by affecting everyone's expectations of one another. This can apply to social roles as much as to digital technologies. The Professional, for example, can be thought of as a social institution which materialises an interpersonal structure of strategic alliance. The scientific peer review system aims to materialise a structure of mutual recognition, though this can be and has been corroded by marketisation.

Almost all public space is now mediated by technologies and institutions with strategic alliance cooked into them at a nuts and bolts level. This makes mutual recognition unstable at best, and systematically undermines the possibility of productive, convergent conversation at large scale. So much for collective agency. This has nothing to do with the sincerity of anyone's intentions---it is a structural feature of the interaction spaces available to the roles defined by these technologies and institutions (roles like the Professional, the Social Entrepreneur, the User). More specifically, it is a product of the way they fail to represent the distinctions required for signalling credible self-disinterest. We converge on strategic alliance not because we actually are selfish actors, but because it is the only stable social strategy in a noisy information environment. In these spaces we are always already professionalised, and this makes activism impossible. Mutual recognition has been deprecated in Human OS 2.021.

<br />
_>> A Brief Theory of Rightwing Success_

Perhaps the most important strategic question for the Left to answer is this one: how did it manage to botch one of the biggest political opportunities of the last half century, namely the financial supernova of 2008? Since then, leftwing movements have failed again and again to land any meaningful blows on the status quo. The scraps of vitality that have emerged have come from either the radical fringe or the old guard, and have all fizzled out after an initial surge. Meanwhile populist reactionary movements have both found their way into the White House, and forced the UK's exit from the European Union. How has the Right been successfully disruptive where the Left has floundered?

Here's a theory based on the argument so far: the ability of the Right to coordinate action is directly tied to the dominance of _progressive_ norms in public space, particularly in the younger and more dynamic social media, to which traditional news media have become increasingly ancillary. Since this space is dysfunctional, being excluded from it is a blessing---it has forced reactionaries to talk to each other directly, setting up a patchwork of horizontal and ad hoc communication structures which both support mutual recognition (and therefore robust consensus) and are largely invisible from the perspective of the mainstream.

Progressives have put more energy into leveraging social media and other public platforms to drive primary momentum. This is often extremely successful in the short term, as messages spread with viral efficiency. But as the bubble inflates, signal credibility deteriorates. It rapidly becomes hard to tell whether people are motivated by conviction or clout, and this makes it impossible for sincere individuals to make judgements about how much personal risk and labour to shoulder. Everyone starts accusing each other of being grifters, and the bubble implodes before anything of substance is achieved. In a final ironic turnabout, the sudden implosion makes it seem like everyone's conviction had been feigned all along. Suspicion starts to produce reality. But this has nothing to do with a true lack of sincerity. It is a guaranteed outcome of an attempt to coordinate political action via communications media with reward structures that systematically undermine the credibility of self-disinterest signals.

<br />
_>> Counter Strategies_

If the line of argument I have been pursuing here is right, then the elusiveness of productive dialogue has little to do with people---with some deficiency in their attitudes, skills, or sensibilities---but is due to the fact that mainstream media spaces simply do not support the forms of normative bonds which consensus seeking discourse depends on. The practical lesson to be drawn from this is that if we want to achieve the kind of discursive vitality that underpins collective agency, then we should move the conversation to a different medium.

What would such a medium look like? Describing a feature set is fairly straightforward---what mutual recognition requires is a reward structure that supports robust credibility signalling. This is about basic stuff like ensuring that not all publicity is good publicity, i.e. building a reputation system attached to real gains and costs (e.g. a downvote mechanism with visibility implications). This makes it possible to trust that status hierarchies are reflections of competence. Another way of reinforcing this is by ensuring the platform has a sensible representation of temporality---for example, threads which return to the top of a public board (which is the same for everyone) as long as anyone is still participating. This makes it harder to avoid criticism by ignoring it. Another is flattening the message hierarchy in conversations, so responses to posts are given the same level of visibility as the thing they respond to. And so on---the point of all this is not to produce good faith impulses that weren't there before, but, by making the structure of credibility public and explicit, to make it possible for people who already wanted to engage in good faith to _trust_ that there's any point in doing so.

Many of the online spaces with the highest degree of crowd-sourced information integrity work along these or similar lines. The remarkable value of Stack Overflow as a community resource, for example, has everything to do with the characteristically fierce manner in which standards are policed by community members. In a different area, fascinating work has been done on the [evolution of norms among Wikipedia editors](https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.01725). In communities which run their own discussion platforms with these kind of features, e.g. Less Wrong, the quality of dialogue is noticeably better, particularly when it comes to consolidation, convergence, and cumulation. (It is interesting that despite a skew towards pro-market sympathies, rationalists often organise their discursive space as if acting under collectivist, subcultural impulses. Compare this with more outwardly left-leaning communities which nevertheless operate on more business-like content models, and tend to spend more energy producing material which foregrounds personality and optimises for consumability, e.g. podcasts.)

The relationship between reputation systems and discourse integrity is often understood well in particular contexts, but its implications for political struggle in the contemporary information environment has received less attention. In all the examples above, conversational integrity is produced by a form of labour which is almost totally absent in more mainstream spaces. This is the labour of _canonisation_---it involves checking for duplicates, consolidating variant ideas, removing bad content, summarising, and so on. This is a labour of destruction, not creation. Canonisation is an activity which can never be rewarded within media spaces structured by strategic alliance, for the simple reason that it is extremely bad at creating extractable value.

Instead, mainstream spaces operate according to a logic of personal accumulation. If someone comes up with a minor variation on an old idea, they are incentivised to immediately package it up as if it were something wildly new and unique and start placing it in circulation as capital---this kind of semiotic splintering and siloing undermines its capacity to enter into productive tension with rival ideas. People cite each other's ideas constantly but without consolidating their differences, because that requires a kind of respectful adversity which works against the spirit of both mutual promotion (by being too adversarial) and performative antagonism (by being too respectful). In this environment a conversation can never get anywhere, because the moment a new twist is introduced it bifurcates into a new conversation. There is a structural incentive to keep starting new conversations, the effect of which is a guarantee that none will ever finish.

It is sometimes said that we are faced with a meaning crisis. Perhaps this is true, but what kind of crisis could this be? If it means that there is a _lack_ of meaning in our world, then its solution would depend on finding ways to create the meaning we have lost. But this can't be right. Wander into any urban centre, look on any screen, any artificial surface---we are living in the most symbolically saturated environment there has ever been. If there is a meaning crisis, then it seems to be one born not of a lack but an _excess_, an over-abundance of meanings that makes deciding which ones to share impossible. If this is the case then the solution lies not in the production of meaning, but---somewhat paradoxically---in its destruction.

<br />
_>> Why this is Difficult_

I began this post asking what it is that makes a conversation capable of convergence. I've argued productive dialogue depends for its interpersonal basis on a structure of mutual recognition which is rendered unstable in most contemporary media and institutional spaces. A common though often unspoken assumption is that the failure of public dialogue stems from a failure of the individuals participating in it. Against this I've argued (in a McLuhanite vein) that the failure is necessitated by the formal structure of public space itself. But even if the medium really is the message, this need not be read as a fatalistic conclusion---it simply suggests that we would do better to seek political agency in our _choice of medium_ than in our _production of messages_. Recovering the conditions of collective agency is a matter of redirecting discursive energy away from mainstream media and into communications spaces structured by mutual recognition. If public space is dysfunctional, the solution is to rebuild it from the ground up.

This is a call for collective action, and as such it faces some specific difficulties. It requires people to move their labour from spaces where they can expect a direct return in extractable value to those in which it gets locked into specific community contexts, will likely be invisible from the outside and therefore impossible to cash in on the open market. This is hard not because people are narrowly self-interested in the final analysis, but because it's a coordination problem---many people need to act at the same time because it is pointless to do it alone, no matter how noble.

Collective action requires more than individuals with conviction: it also requires that individuals are confident of one another's conviction. But this confidence is precisely what is undermined by our noisy information environment. When we look out into our world for potential collaborators what we find is primarily a load of people _producing content_---an activity which can be plausibly interpreted as motivated by either self-interest or by conviction. What they are _saying_ may be all sparkles and paradigm shifts, but what they are _doing_ is always ambiguous (and couldn't not be). In almost all cases it is impossible to work out where the bottom line really is, i.e. which would win out if self-interest and conviction came into conflict. But as an individual looking to front labour for collective action, _this_ is the answer you need. What you need is a credible signal that others are prepared to join you in suspending present self-interest for the sake of a collective long-game. And this is the signal you'll never receive.

It seems we're faced with a paradox: fixing a dysfunctional public sphere is a coordination problem, but since this is the very communications space we use to coordinate action, the dysfunction undermines its own correction. The breakdown of public dialogue is also a breakdown in our ability to fix it: the problem creates its own meta-problem. As individuals, the experience of being caught in this maelstrom is disorienting. The feeling that individual action is futile coincides with the feeling that collective action is impossible, a meta-critical loop that bounces back and forth between a reductive individualism powerless in the face of global forces, and a hopelessly abstract collectivism which fails to index any concrete community. What we'd really like to know is which actions we should take as _individuals_ to help create the conditions for _collective_ action. One of the aims of this post has been to insist that this tangle is not a spiritual or emotional tangle, as is often assumed, but that it is _rational_ through and through. Untangling it will be the subject of the next post.
