---
layout: post
title: "Frenzied Stasis"
date: 2021-11-04 05:23:00
categories: [postmodernism, metamodernism, inertia]
published: false
---

That the political situation in the West is defined by a certain _stasis_ is a suggestion that has, since the 1990's at least, been made by theorists with a variety of goals and allegiances. Whether labelled 'the end of history' (Fukuyama), a 'crisis of negativity' (Badiou), or a 'state of inertia' (Turner), a picture has been drawn of capitalist democracies as places where far-reaching social upheaval is simply no longer possible, whether or not it is desirable. But despite the fanciful appearance of a world where 'events are on strike' (Baudrillard), this image has only grown more compelling since Fukuyama's original prognosis in 1992. Even in the face of events that seemed capable of destabilising it---the attack on the World Trade Centre in 2001, the financial crash of 2008, and the election of Donald Trump to the US presidency in 2014---the neoliberal status quo first established by Reagan and Thatcher in the late 1980's has displayed a near infinite capacity to reassert itself. All political thought now reckons with its supreme gravity.

The thesis that the socio-political order is frozen in place is not inconsistent with the parallel observation that, in many other respects, the system has accelerated. Material consumption, cultural production, affective circulation, information dissemination, and individual choice have all continued to expand to ever more giddy extremes. But the claim that this represents true dynamism is subject to suspicion. The conveyor belt of contemporary cultural production, for instance, has seemed to many to be little more than shadow play, a hyperactive reassembly of content masking an absence of any true innovation in form (Fisher), nothing more than an endless parade of new variations on old themes. The 'accelerative' dimension of the system can thus be interpreted not as a line of flight from this equilibrium, but as evidence of its increasingly frenzied character. At the political level, the dual nature of this frenzied stasis has been registered by the coincidence of liberated individual choice with the collapse of collective agency.
