---
layout: post
title: "Baudrillard vs Vitalism"
date: 2021-10-10 05:23:00
categories: [baudrillard, value]
published: false
---

> Supposing we agree with Foucault [...], what would remain of [Discipline and Punish]'s essential idea? Basically this: it substitutes a negative, reactive, and transcendental conception of power which is founded on interdiction and law for a positive, active, and immanent conception, and this is in fact essential. Once can only be struck by the coincidence between this new version of power and the new version of desire proposed by Deleuze and Lyotard: but there, instead of lack or interdiction, one finds the deployment and the positive dissemination of flows and intensities. Such a coincidence is not accidental: _it's simply that in Foucault power takes the place of desire_. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 34--35 %}

> The production channel leads from work to sex, but only by switching tracks; as we move from political to 'libidinal' economy (the last acquisition of '68'), we change from a violent and archaic model of socialization (work) to a more subtle and fluid model which is at once more 'psychic' and more in touch with the body (the sexual and the libidinal). There is a metamorphosis and a veering away from labor power to drive (_pulsion_), a veering away from a model founded on a system of representations (the famous 'ideology') to a model operating on a system of affect (sex being only a kind of anamorphosis of the categorical social imperative). From one discourse to another---since it really is a question of discourse---there runs the same ultimatum of _pro-duction_ in the literal sense of the word. The original sense of 'production' is not in fact that of material manufacture; rather, it means to render visible, to cause to appear and be made to appear: _pro-ducere_. Sex is produced as one produces a document, or as an actor is said to appear (_se produire_) on stage. To produce is to force what belongs to another order (that of secrecy and seduction) to materialize. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 37 %}

> We do not understand, or we vaguely sympathize with, those cultures for which the sexual act has no finality in itself and for which sexuality does not have the deadly seriousness of an energy to be freed, a forced ejaculation, a production at all costs, or of a hygienic reckoning of the body. These are cultures which maintain long processes of seduction and sensuousness in which sexuality is one service among others, a long procedure of gifts and counter-gifts; lovemaking is only the eventual outcome of this reciprocity measured to the rhythm of an ineluctable ritual. For us, this no longer has any meaning: for us, _the secual has become strictly the actualization of a desire in a moment of pleasure---all the rest is 'literature.' What an extraordinary crystallization of the orgastic function, which is itself the materialization of an energetic substance. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 38--39 %}

> More and more, all seduction, all manner of seduction (which is itself a highly _ritualized_ process), disappears behind the _naturalized_ sexual imperative calling for the immediate realization of a desire. Our center of gravity has in fact shifted toward an unconscious and libidinal economy which only leaves room for the total naturalization of a desire bound either to fateful drives or to pure and simple mechanical operation, but above all to the imaginary order of repression and liberation. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 39 %}

> This compulsion toward liquidity, flow, and an accelerated circulation of what is psychic, sexual, or pertaining to the body is the exact replica of the force which rules market value: capital must circulate; gravity and any fixed point must disappear, the chain of investments and reinvestments must never stop; value must radiate endlessly and in every direction. This is the form itself in which the current realization of value takes place. It is the form of capital, and sexuality as a catchword and a _model_ is the way it appears at the level of bodies. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 39--40 %}

> [T]o rediscover in the secret of bodies an unbound 'libidinal' energy which would be opposed to the bound energy of productive bodies, and to rediscover a phantasmal and instinctual truth of the body in desire, is still only to unearth the psychic metaphor of capital. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 40 %}

> This is what Foucault tells us (in spite of himself): nothing functions with repression (_répression_), everything functions with production; nothing functions with repression (_refoulement_), everything functions with liberation. But it is the _same thing_. Any form of liberation is fomented by repression: the liberation of productive forces is like that of desire; the liberation of bodies is like that of women's liberation, etc. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 41 %}

> To talk about sexuality, 'repressed' or not, 'sublimated' or not, in feudal, rural, and primitive societies is a sign of utter foolishness (like reinterpreting religion, _ne varietur_, as ideology and mystification) . And on that basis, then, it becomes possible again to say with Foucault: _there is not and there has never been any repression in our culture either_---not, however, according to his meaning, but in the sense that there has never truly been any sexuality. Sexuality, like political economy, is only _montage_ (all of whose twists and turns Foucault analyzes); sexuality as we hear about it and as it 'is spoken,' even as the 'id speaks,' is only a simulacrum which experience has forever crossed up, baffled, and surpassed, as in any system. The coherence and transparence of _homo sexualis_ has never had more reality than that of _homo oeconomicus_. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 43 %}

> We see what benefit there is over the old finalist, dialectical, or repressive theories in supposing a total positivity, a teleonomy and a microphysics of power, but we must also see what we are getting into: a strange complicity with cybernetics which challenge precisely the same earlier schemas [...]. The same can be said of Deleuze's molecular topology of desire, whose flows and connections will soon converge if they have not already done so with genetic simulations, micro cellular drifts, and the random facilitations (_frayages_) of code manipulators. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 46--47 %}

> Foucault at least economizes desire, as well as history (but being very prudent, he does not deny them), yet everything still comes back to _some kind_ of power---without having that notion reduced and expurgated---just as with Deleuze everything comes back to _some kind_ of desire, or with Lyotard to _some kind_ of intensity: these are shattered notions, yet they remain miraculously intact in their current acceptance. Desire and intensity remain _force_/notions; with Foucault power remains, despite being pulverized, a _structural_ and a polar notion with a perfect genealogy and an inexplicable presence, a notion which cannot be surpassed in spite of a sort of latent denunciation, a notion which is whole in each of its points or microscopic dots. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 49 %}

> Foucault unmasks all the final or causal illusions concerning power, but he does not tell us anything _concerning the simulacrum of power itself_. Power is an irreversible principle of organization because it fabricates the real (always more and more of the real), effecting a quadrature, nomenclature, and dictature without appeal; nowhere does it cancel itself out, become entangled in itself, or mingle with death. In this sense, even if it has no finality and no last judgment, power returns to its own identity again as a _final principle_: it is the last term, the irreducible web, the last tale that can be told; it is what structures the indeterminate equation of the word. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 50 %}

> Neither an agency (_instance_), a structure, a substance, nor in fact a force relation, power is a challenge. From the power puppet of primitive societies which talks but has nothing to say to the current form of power which is there only to exorcise the absence of power, a whole cycle has been covered which is one of a double challenge, the challenge of power against all of society and the challenge against those who hold power. This is the secret history both of power and its catastrophe. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 59 %}

> All forms of power have endeavored to camouflage this fundamental challenge in the form of force relations such as dominator/ dominated and exploiter/exploited, thereby channeling all resistance into a frontal relation (even reduced to microstrategies, this conception still dominates in Foucault: the puzzle of guerilla warfare has simply been substituted for the chessboard of classical battle). For in terms of force relations, power always wins, even if it changes hands as revolutions come and go. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 60 %}

> But it is doubtful if anyone has ever thought it possible to exorcise power by force. Rather, each person knows deep down that any form of power is a personal challenge, a challenge to the death, and one that can only be answered by a counterchallenge to break the logic of power or, even better, to enclose it in a circular logic. Such is the nature of this counterchallenge nonpolitical, nondialectical, and nonstrategic-but whose strength throughout history has nonetheless been incalculable: this is the challenge which dares those who hold power to exercise it to the limit and which can only spell death for those who are dominated. A challenge to power to be power, power of the sort that is total, irreversible, without scruple, and with no limit to its violence. No form of power dares go that far (to the point where in any case it too would be destroyed). And so it is facing this unanswerable challenge that power starts to break up. {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 60--61 %}




## References
{% bibliography --cited %}
