---
layout: post
title: "Some Further Reflections on Metamodernism"
date: 2021-06-22 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: false
---

It's been a few months since I put [Against Metamodernism](https://samuelludford.medium.com/against-metamodernism-51be3cbbe751) up on Medium, and I figured now might be a good moment to step back and give a few candid reflections on some of the observations that motivated it. I say candid---the original piece was intended as a kind of friendly polemic, something aimed at people who already inhabit that space to some extent, and its rhetoric was calculated to reflect that. There was a whole load of background stuff that got cut from a much longer original draft, after I realised it would be doing no work in that context. This mostly related to what metamodernism the phenomenon looks like from the theoretical position I currently inhabit, and this is what I'd like to return to here.

<!--more-->

One thing I deliberately avoided getting into was fine-grained quibbles about the meaning, history and propriety of the term "metamodernism." As I'll attempt to diagnose more fully later on, one of the things I've always found striking about metamodernism (and here I am referring to the discourse as a whole, encompassing anyone who self-consciously chooses to use the term to define or delimit their project, culturally or politically or even through adjacency) is the absurd mismatch between the huge amount of energy it spends writing its own history and the far smaller amount spent on producing the specific, detailed, contentful analyses and strategies that could, like, you know, provide an actual _subject matter_ for this history. Definitional questions are uninteresting, and questions of historical propriety are interesting only insofar as they answer to some actual concrete series of past achievements. But in the discourse of metamodernism, this strange thing happens where the production of those concrete achievements always seems to be displaced in favour of a pre-emptive telling of their history, which then obviously never comes to pass because no-one is making it (they're all doing podcasts about what it will look like when someone else makes it). The end result is this weird sort of endless combinatoric permutation where everyone just keeps retelling the same insubstantial history of histories. Tell it persistently and loudly enough and perhaps you'll get spliced into the next iteration, like a reproduction without an original.

What's that? Sounds a bit pomo? _Yes it fucking does_---it is exactly the pattern that Frederic Jameson analysed under the heading of "pastiche." And _this_ is the thing I find interesting about it, the reason why I think and write about it: it seems to me that metamodernism is a quintessential postmodern artefact. To unpack this claim and what it implies, I'll have to do some of the quibbling I tried to avoid in the original piece. When it comes to confusions surrounding the meaning or referent of "metamodernism," it seems fairly clear that these are to a large extent inherited directly from similar confusions that have long surrounded "postmodernism." Much of the reason they persist as confusions is, I believe, not because they are particularly confusing but because within metamodernist literature the original confusions were never addressed. The way to assess metamodernism as a cultural phenomenon is to pick apart the different senses of the postmodern, and then measure its self-narration against each of them separately.

## 1. The Postmodern Condition ≠ Postmodernism

Actually it's perhaps a bit simpler than that---all that's really needed is to distinguish between _two_ senses, one corresponding to "the postmodern condition" and another to the effects of this condition. The important thing about the postmodern _condition_ is that it refers not to any set of values, beliefs, sensibilities or structures of feeling, but to a concrete situation. Being in the postmodern condition is not a reflection of anything going on internally with you, but rather of your socio-cultural location---your presence within a particular kind of context. Historically this new context emerged in Western Democracies after World War II before becoming established in the second half of the century, but the key shift that defines it is the commodification of the public and cultural spheres. This event marked the official defeat of the earlier avant-gardes' (aka modernists) project of mobilising culture against the homogenising forces of the market: surrealist techniques once thought to be revolutionary were now effortlessly deployed in advertising campaigns, stuff like that. Fundamentally, the postmodern condition is about the economic structure of the communications environment in late capitalism.

Attempts to theorise the postmodern condition inevitably did so via consideration of its effects. In Lyotard this took the shape of an analysis of the deterioration of the conditions of institutional legitimacy. Jameson focused on the new forms of art and architecture which self-consciousnessly reacted to this new condition. Meanwhile Baudrillard was more interested in the emerging folk cultural tropes that unwittingly displayed its symptoms, and attempted to derive its deep logic directly by fusing Marx's critique of the commodity form with Saussurean structuralism. The term "postmodernism" referred to the effects of the postmodern condition, whether certain styles or techniques in art and literature that react to it, or cultural tropes that display it (as when Samuel L Jackson is described as a postmodern actor because his persona precedes him to such an extent that it is the only role he ever plays).

## 2. Symptom and Cause

Here's what I think goes wrong with metamodernism: it identifies the postmodern condition with its symptoms, then when it correctly observes that these symptoms have changed, it wrongly concludes that the postmodern condition is crumbling. I don't think this is what is happening at all. I think what has happened is that the postmodern condition has _deepened_, and that the symptoms have changed because this deepening has restructured the space of possible response.

I'll flesh this out a bit more shortly, but first I should probably try to demonstrate where the slippage occurs and what's at stake in it. As it happens this slippage is cooked into metamodernism right from the beginning, and by "beginning" I mean the first few sentences of the abstract to Vermeulen and van der Akker's perennially flowering [Notes on Metamodernism](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.3402/jac.v2i0.5677):

> The postmodern years of plenty, pastiche, and parataxis are over. In fact, if we are to believe the many academics, critics, and pundits whose books and essays describe the decline and demise of the postmodern, they have been over for quite a while now. But if these commentators agree the postmodern condition has been abandoned, they appear less in accord as to what to make of the state it has been abandoned for.

I'm going to return to this text a few times, but what I want to highlight at this point is the sheer ambiguity built into these opening sentences. A move away from "plenty, pastiche, and parataxis" in cultural production does not represent an abandonment of the postmodern condition in the sense outlined above. What has been abandoned rather is a particular set of artistic strategies that tried to _react_ to it. These may be replaced by new strategies, but this in itself would tell us nothing about whether the postmodern condition itself has shifted. The ease with which this kind of phrasing flows onto the page bears witness to how easy it is to conflate symptom and cause in these cases.

Making a fuss about this distinction may seem pedantic, but it has practical consequences when imported into a political context. As I said earlier, definitional questions are uninteresting---the correct applications of terms is not what is under issue here. But from a political perspective, what is required from a cultural theory is some kind of analysis of the real forces at work in society. Of course you _could_ back off from this as a cultural theorist---you could content yourself with thick description and categorisation, with taxonomies of surface effects---but honestly, what is the point if not to understand their significance within broader social and historical patterns? What we'd like to know, surely, is to what extent a shift in cultural _symptoms_ speaks to a change in the underlying cultural _logic_ that shapes our social reality.

## 3. Irony and Inertia

Eggzample. Political metamodernism has often been concerned with the link between postmodernism and a perceived state of inertia. But what exactly is this link?  Making it explicit requires careful symptom-cause distinctions, and on this front the analysis has often fallen short. To illustrate this, I'd like to consider what has become one of the ur-takes of metamodernism: the critique of irony often associated with David Foster Wallace. This critique comes about as a response to the irony-saturated (viz. postmodern) cultural environment of the 1990's. Its key idea is that when being ironic you are never really playing your hand---all you are doing is snarking from the sidelines like the two muppets Statler and Waldorf, but never really getting involved in the action. An ironic culture can never gain anything because it never _risks_ anything, and this is why it is condemned to a state of inertia.  

This take is simple, but there's a lot going on in the background. Its most important feature is that it explicitly identifies irony as a causal factor in the production of inertia. This diagnosis licenses certain practical conclusions, namely that in order to shift the inertia we should become less ironic, or at least ironic in some way that doesn't paralyse action. This is a suggestion to cultivate new sensibilities, to come into touch with a new structure of feeling. When stuff starts appearing in culture which seems to do just that---people in sitcoms start being all sincere and tacky again, but still with that knowing wink---it is seized on as overcoming postmodernism, not just for lame definitional reasons but because it appears to move beyond the thing that was causing the inertia.

I think this line of thought is based on a mistake. The ironic tone that infused many of the cultural products of the 90's was (I claim) not a _cause_ of inertia but a _reaction_ to inertia---its causes lay elsewhere. I can begin to justify this by asking a question: what kind of situation merits an ironic response? Irony (in the postmodern sense) involves a kind of suspension of commitment---to wear 80's clothes ironically is to wear them without earnest, to play with an aesthetic while always maintaining plausible deniability with respect to any of its associated allegiances and expectations. Irony is pessimistic, always revealing a self-mocking awareness of its own lack of commitment as part of its performative gambit. Irony says: I'm acting without earnest because the very idea of earnest action is absurd.

It is as if the metamodern critique interprets this as a kind of global or metaphysical attitude, a cynical assessment of action in general. From this it draws the conclusion that the ironist is paralysed _by_ this attitude. They can never win anything because they never throw down any chips. But another interpretation is that this ironic mode is reactive to _particular_ circumstances. On this interpretation irony is viewed as a strategic response to the enclosure of possibilities---an attitude appropriate to the realisation that no matter what move you play now, in the next you'll be checkmated for sure. The ironist refuses to throw down not because they are timid, but because they believe the game has already been lost.

I think the second interpretation offers a much more compelling reading of 90's irony: it was reactive, a last-ditch attempt to _protest_ the deep sense of paralysis brought on by the postmodern condition. This paralysis should be understood primarily as a function of the context---specifically, of the economic structure of the communications environment---not of the attitudes, sensibilities, or psychology of the individuals inhabiting it. The inertial dynamics of this context can perhaps best be illustrated through the lens of the Kurt Cobain effect: nothing sells better on MTV than someone raging against MTV. This situation construes a kind of strategic capture: it is irrelevant what you do or how you express yourself, since all expressions are equivalent according to the economics of public appearance. You can comply or rebel---doesn't matter, the shareholders get paid either way. This is the same logic captured colloquially in the somewhat hackneyed phrase, "all publicity is good publicity." The dynamic is paralysing because it reduces all differences to functional equivalences, and thereby systematically removes their stakes: it doesn't matter whether you're an ethical person or a shitbag, both can get you followers on Twitter. Your depression can become a marketable asset if you package it in a way which is funny and light. The public space of late capitalism is one in which no-one is ever judged on the basis of their actions, but only on how well they wear the costume they have chosen. Irony is the attitude that interprets this situation pessimistically, as rendering authenticity impossible.

In this logic we come much closer to the essence of the postmodern condition as theorised by Jameson et al than we would by identifying it with any of the affects, tropes or artistic techniques that arose in response to it. Here we begin to close in on the _content_ of the cultural logic of late capitalism, the economic form that governs the production and circulation of its symbols and ideas. I'll try to progressively draw out this logic over the course of the post. For now the lesson is this: if postmodern irony was a reaction to the sense of inertia produced by the marketisation of the public and cultural spheres, then it is profoundly misguided to suggest that shifting the irony is what could shift the inertia.

## 4. The Collapse of the Auditorium

As a form of protest, irony depends on a collective awareness of disempowerment. If this era can still be described as the society of the spectacle, then the ironic mode shows up as one appropriate to an audience who _understand their role as an audience_. The relation between audience and spectacle is not a question of attitudes or sensibilities, but a matter of economic context: one does not experience events or shared visions as something one _participates_ in because within this context they only ever appear in the form of consumer products, content---collective visions repackaged for personal consumption. For someone aware of their predicament of being always-already displaced into the role of a spectator, the only reasonable attitude is, well, Statler and Waldorf's---find yourself a good seat and start throwing canapés at the opera chorus.





## Extras

It is the result of replacing a public stage on which social visions struggle against one another to produce monopolising consensus with a marketplace in which increasingly niche takes vie for scraps of consumer share. When cultural, intellectual, and political life are organised on the basis of producer-consumer relations, items of public life are paradoxically optimised for personal consumption, and therefore multiplied in cascading levels of local variation. This makes them useless for coordinating group action, a function dependent on the scarcity of signs.

(The latest example I've seen is [this one](https://systems-souls-society.com/metamodernism-and-the-perception-of-context-the-cultural-between-the-political-after-and-the-mystic-beyond/#_edn1) from Jonathon Rowson---ten thousand words of empty pedagogy beginning with what almost looks like an apology for having written it.)

(or where there is a nugget of substance, it's often imported off-the-shelf and uncritically from someone like Timothy Morton, as if saying the word "hyperobject" enough might act as banishing magic)

It is dutifully retweeted, but does anyone engage deeply? Does anyone try to draw some lurking threads and make them explicit? Does anyone provide a counter-critique? Does anyone try to extract a concrete course of action from it? Of course they don't. What they will do is name-drop it in their own what is metamodernism anyway think piece, as custom decrees.
