---
layout: post
title: "Note on Bad Incentives"
date: 2021-10-09 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: true
---

A while back I wrote [a post](http://127.0.0.1:4000/2021/08/04/structure-agency.html) about structuralist and humanist approaches to social theory and political thought, how each looks cynical from the point of view of the other, and the impasses this can produce.

An example of this tension then came up a few days ago in a discussion I was having about the role of bad incentives in pathological discourse. The point of contention was whether such pathologies are necessitated by the incentive structure of the space itself, or whether they are the fault of bad actors within the space. This question has obvious strategic significance: if one takes the latter position, then the discourse could in principle be de-pathologised by piling good actors into the space; if one takes the former position, then this cannot work because it fails to address the root cause of the pathology, and those good actors will ultimately just become complicit in sustaining it (and if this assessment is right, then the solution would be to create new discursive spaces with non-pathological incentives).

<!--more-->

Naturally, my position leaned towards the former: pathological discourse seems so ubiquitous to me that it cannot possibly be explained as resulting primarily from the presence of bad actors (which is not to say that there are no bad actors---obviously, bad actors will steadily come to dominate a space with bad incentives---what is at issue is which is the cause and which is the symptom). This stance found me labelled a cynic. However, from where I was sitting this seemed to misunderstand the argument in important ways. This got me thinking about two possible ways of interpreting this argument, one of which is genuinely cynical (but rests on bad humanist assumptions) and one which is not (and is properly structuralist).

The first (bad) argument says that bad incentives produce pathological discourse because humans are essentially self-interested, so when bad faith engagement is incentivised we simply cannot help ourselves. Obviously, what makes this argument cynical is precisely the fact that it posits an essential selfishness in human nature. In doing so it excuses the bad actors, not by trying to dispute their status as bad actors but by claiming that they couldn't fail to become bad actors, given the external conditions they were exposed to. While undoubtedly cynical, this reasoning nevertheless lies on humanistic foundations: in positing intrinsic self-interest, it diagnoses the pathological discourse as stemming from certain psychological facts about human individuals. When I was accused of cynicism, I suspect I was being interpreted as making this argument.

But actually I think this argument is pretty terrible, precisely because of its cynical humanist assumptions. I do not think that pathological discourse arises because bad incentives turn people into bad actors; I think bad incentives can produce pathological discourse directly, which is to say from perfectly good faith intentions. The reason is simply that the presence of bad incentives undermines everyone's ability to communicate their motives to one another. Or to put it different, bad incentives make it objectively more difficult to reason about other people's decision procedure. This can be catastrophic, because the trust required to produce healthy discourse requires that individual actors are able to make confident judgements about whether the explicit commitments of others can be taken as accurate representations of their motives, intentions, and bottom lines. The issue, then, is _not_ that incentivised bad faith engagement actually produces bad faith impulses in individuals, but that wherever such incentives exist it will become systematically harder to distinguish imperfect good faith engagement from bad faith engagement, and this in turn will undermine our ability to make judgements about where to direct our own energies. None of this depends on any assumptions about human psychology. The key premise is simply that _trust is an intrinsically difficult problem_, and can easily be destabilised when noise is introduced into the signalling systems we use to communicate values to one another.

This second version of the argument is properly structuralist, and to my mind non-cynical. To reiterate the broad conclusion of the previous post, it seems to me that the strategic impasse the left is stuck in takes the form of a deadlock between optimistic and pessimistic variants of humanism. But the apparent conflict between then is a mirage, and it mislocates the stakes---they fail not on account of being too optimistic or too pessimistic, but because their shared humanism leaves them incapable of having meaningful responses to structural problems.
