---
layout: post
title: "A Hegelian Perspective on Perspectivalism"
date: 2021-11-04 05:23:00
categories: [hegel, metamodernism, epistemology, zizek]
published: true
---

Here are some follow up thoughts to an objection to perspectivalism I raised in [Against Metamodernism](https://samuelludford.medium.com/against-metamodernism-51be3cbbe751). What I'd like to do is consider how a core theme from Hegelian dialectics---namely the experience of error---can inform the discussion as it has taken shape in these spaces.

<!--more-->

But first some clarification about the relationship between perspectivalism and metamodernism, which will help to frame the main point. The nature of this relationship was one point of consternation in the discussion I had with Greg Dember in response to the piece (reproduced in a more readable format [here](https://systems-souls-society.com/is-oscillation-the-heart-of-metamodernism-if-not-does-it-have-a-heart/)). My assertion was that metamodernist 'oscillation' licenses a perspectivalist epistemology; Greg's objection was that perspectivalism is postmodern, not metamodern---that perspectivalism can be construed as an 'oscillation across perspectives' is simply not relevant to metamodernism, which is defined by the more specific oscillation between modernism and postmodernism.

To me this seems overly coy: it is not difficult to see why an endorsement of general perspectival oscillation would follow from a specific oscillation between modern and postmodern sensibilities. If we must speak this way, then epistemologically what characterises modernism is optimistic universalism, and what characterises postmodernism is _pessimistic_ perspectivalism. Postmodernism recognises the impossibility of the universal, and from this derives a quietist moral: don't bother trying to get outside your local perspective, in doing so you'll surely replicate some structure of oppression or other. Go do something else, like poetry or snark. A metamodern epistemological sensibility, then, would (as Greg [agrees](https://thesideview.co/journal/what-is-metamodernism-and-why-does-it-matter/)) be one of _optimistic perspectivalism_. And what is it that is expressed in the call to actively oscillate between perspectives if not optimistic perspectivalism? This sensibility is perspectivalist, but not quietist: there is no universal perspective, it says, but there is still good honest work to be done traversing and integrating all the local ones.

(One question that could raise be raised at this point, but rarely is: what about pessimistic universalism? Doesn't this hold just as much claim to be the product of an oscillation between modern and postmodern sensibilities? In fact, one person who could potentially be described as a pessimistic universalist is Žižek. And of course, it is Žižek who represents one of the other major [attack vectors against postmodernism]({{site.baseurl}}/2021/08/23/zizek-poststructuralism.html). To the best of my knowledge this is a vector that metamodernist thought is yet to engage with.)

But enough about what a metamodern epistemology means or could mean, instead let's step back to consider what it is it we're actually aiming at here. The notion of 'oscillation' is, as I have argued, superfluous if not downright misleading. If we look carefully at the characterisations of the modern and postmodern given above, it becomes clear that they share a presupposition. Modernism claims epistemic authority because it thinks it has access to the universal perspective; postmodernism holds that since there is no universal perspective any claim to epistemic authority is a pretence---what they share is the belief that insofar as it exists, epistemic authority belongs to and only to the universal perspective. Given this observation, why on earth would anyone think it necessary to oscillate between them? Insofar as they present a deadlock, breaking it will rather be a matter of finding a way to disagree with both of them. And now we know how to do this: what is required is an account of epistemic authority which neither arbitrarily grants it to a specific local perspective, nor attaches it to and only to the view-from-nowhere.

What we'd really like is for epistemic authority to emerge bottom-up, as some kind of collaboration between local perspectives. Presumably this is what people are going for when they talk about things like 'both-and' reasoning. But the details matter. Of course, one way to solve our problem would be to treat _all_ local perspectives as intrinsically authoritative. And indeed this is the form that optimistic perspectivalism has a tendency to drift towards, an idea often expressed with perhaps the most leaky metaphor of all time: the blind men and the elephant. While usually invoked as a justification for religious pluralism, this metaphor can function as a stand in for the perspectivalist ethos in general. We know how it goes: each guy gets hold of a different part of the elephant, and they all argue with each other about how it really is.

The superficial lesson sometimes drawn from this metaphor is that their conflict is an illusion because they are all right. The superficiality lies in the conflation the _de re_ and _de dicto_ aspects of speech, or what is being spoken of and what is being said of it. For instance, an initiate of advaita vedanta might speak of 'samadhi' while a Zen practioner might speak of 'satori,' and it might reasonably be concluded that they are referring to the same mystical experience. But nevertheless there are incompatibilities: for instance Zen sometimes speaks of 'little' or 'partial' satori, whereas samadhi is unequivocally an absolute state, something attained in full or not at all. That they speak of the same thing does not imply that they agree in what they say about it, and in fact the conflicting implications of these concepts seems to imply that at least one of them must be wrong, or that they do not in fact refer to the same thing.

Of course, the mistake here is the inference from the banal observation that all perspectives have something useful to contribute to the absurd one that they are all, in some nontrivial sense, true. Alarm bells should really have been ringing from the get go, because if this were the case then there would be no need for any kind of _collaboration_ between perspectives, since they would in effect come 'pre-furnished' with epistemic authority.

It is at this juncture that the Hegelian intervention is staged. It consists in the assertion that the useful thing that each perspective can contribute is precisely the way in which it is _wrong_. The collaborative project that the varying perspectives are engaged in is to be understood, on this model, in terms of the integration of error. When one blind man says it is a square while another says it is a circle, integration will have been achieved only at the point that it has been mutually understood exactly why it is that a circular thing sometimes appears to be square, or why a square thing sometimes appears to be circular, or why something which is neither square nor circular sometimes appears to be square and at others appears to be circular. Only once such an understanding has been reached will it be possible to combine the two perspectives into a synoptic vision.

There's a number of points to make about this. The first is that this collaboration depends critically on the possibility of error, of the recognition of a gap between reality and appearance. And it this possibility that is elided by the empty validation of optimistic perspectivalism---in granting a _sui generis_ epistemic authority to the perspective of the other, perspectivalism tacitly removes the authority of any other perspective to challenge it. The form of recognition required by the Hegelian model does not, by contrast, place an unchallengeable epistemic authority anywhere. Instead it radicalises the possibility of challenge: the authority I must grant to the other is precisely the authority to challenge my authority. Stable epistemic authority is instituted by this configuration in the form of a network effect, supported by the mutual recognition among participants of an epistemic _responsibility_.

Second, the central role it finds for error (or negation) is what allows the Hegelian picture to dodge any kind of tacit universalism. This is because a God's eye view is not needed to discover that a perspective has erred---all that is required is a different angle on the elephant.

Third, it also avoids the opposite problem of empty antagonism. The crucial point here is that it is not enough to simply point out _that_ some perspective is in error---in this case nothing positive would be learned. The distinctively collaborative labour shows up only in the process of uncovering the exact _how_ and _why_ of the mistake. The experience of error is an experience with a _content_---this content represents what it is possible to learn in such an experience, the positive dimension of error captured in the Hegelian concept of 'determinate negation.' The difference between formal and determinate negation (between saying that someone is wrong and saying how they are wrong) is often under appreciated, fuelling some of the more misguided criticisms of Hegelian dialectics (the ['Deleuzian' critique](({{site.baseurl}}/2021/07/04/deleuze-hegel.html)), for instance).

This final point helps to make clear what is practically at stake in this question. I'm sure no-one who subscribes to something like 'earnest perspectivalism' or 'epistemic metamodernism' or 'both-and' reasoning or whatever would endorse any kind of naive, create-ur-own-reality theory of epistemic legitimacy. Everyone with skin in this game is officially aiming at some kind of collaborative model, a discursive praxis which can actually produce effective consensus while drawing only on resources provided by local, situated perspectives, and without hypostasising some fictional universal viewpoint. But this project will remain vacuous so long as it merely emphasises a conjunctive over a disjunctive attitude ('both-and' over 'either-or'), or conflates paying compliments with careful reading.

Everyone knows it's good to read across conflicting perspectives. But what does this 'reading' really entail? Is it to step up on the balcony to survey the battlefield, mediating the beef from a neutral distance? Or is it about inviting everyone to stop fighting and step up onto the balcony with you? It is neither---after all there is no balcony. What reading across a conflict between X and Y means is getting down there in the pit and crossing swords with both of them. To do this is to perform interpretive labour, and involves doing things like translating them into a common idiom to make their disagreements explicit, identifying and rejecting particular background assumptions, uncovering ambiguities and deciding them in one direction or the other, and so on. Each of these activities is essential if anything like 'reading' can be said to be happening, and each of them implicates the background perspective of the reader.
