---
layout: post
title: "Structure and Optimism"
date: 2021-08-04 05:23:00
categories: [thoughts]
published: true
---

When it comes to social and political thinking I lean far more towards structure than agency, and often find myself talking with people who consider this to be pessimistic. At a superficial level I can see where they're coming from---it is, after all, structural critique that has given us the images of all-pervasive ideology, of capitalist realism, of a system so totalising it has always-already absorbed all attempts to resist it---in short, of an iron cage of power. Against all this, the humanist who stresses the role of human action in shaping the social world certainly seem to present more hopeful prospects for changing it.

<!--more-->

Ultimately though, I disagree: I think it is the humanist who is the cynic. To hold that human actors are the authors of the social world is to hold they are also the authors of its problems: when shit's messed up the blame can only lie with people. Perhaps they're uneducated, perhaps they're bigots, perhaps they're manipulated, perhaps they're spiritually inhibited, chakras not spinning right, perhaps they simply have incorrect desires---all tempting suggestions in that they make the world's problems seem tractable (like many animals, broken humans can be fixed with training), but only at the price of a supposition that somewhere out there, or perhaps in here, is a bunch of people who are hard failing.

This pattern of reasoning feels very familiar these days, though it is curious that the sedimenting of humanist assumptions within mainstream discourse has coincided with the breakthrough of modes of thought with a distinctively structuralist tenor and history, most explosively on topics of race and gender. Much of the toxicity of contemporary debate seems to result from placing structuralist ideas in humanist frames---for example, construing structural racism as if it were a failing of individuals, a kind of internalised or unconsciousness version of overt racism, something that could in principle be fixed with the right kind of personal development. Humanist assumptions underly a variety of recurring tropes on the merry-go-round of public debate, from the dismissal of Trump or Brexit supporters as stupid or worse to self-flagellating Guardian columns in which the author laments their own inability to stop eating avocados. All represent attempts to find causal mechanisms behind why people behave the way they do, a rhetorical stance whose inadequacy is displayed in the fact that it never actually provides anyone with a _reason_ to behave differently. It is the political equivalent of that 60's guy who complains women won't have sex with him because they're repressed.

Rhetorical inadequacies aside, there's a separate question to be raised about whether the humanist's general conclusion is even true. If there's big problems with society, then the humanist is forced to conclude that there's big problems with people. But are there any independent reasons to believe this? I think not. Let's call the belief that people are basically alright _structuralist optimism_. I label this optimism 'structuralist' to highlight what I think is one of the least understood aspects of structural critique, in fact the very impetus behind it: the attempt to reconcile the huge problems in society with the empirically founded intuition that people are basically alright. I saw this misunderstanding illustrated vividly recently in a reddit thread about Žižek. The commentor was perplexed by a video in which Žižek had expressed admiration for and confidence in normal people, which jarred with their perception of him as an arch-cynic. Of course, Žižek's 'cynicism' was a reference to his structuralism---to his insistence on the totalising role of ideology in shaping the social world. But to characterise this insistence as cynical is to exactly miss the thing that motivates it. The reason Žižek has such an elaborate theory of ideology is precisely to _preserve_ his commitment to the basic alrightness of people.

Unlike the humanist, the structuralist takes the banality of evil seriously. As someone with a background in mathematics and analytic philosophy, this point was originally driven home to me not by critical theory but by game theory, and in particular by the prisoner's dilemma. Dan Dennett once described Darwin's concept of natural selection as a 'universal acid,' an idea so deep and pervasive that it rewires the way you think about everything. I think something similar could be said of the prisoner's dilemma, which gives a deceptively simple yet mathematically robust explanation of the intrinsic difficulty of cooperation (even mutually beneficial cooperation), making clear that failures of group cooperation need not arise from failures of individual rationality or integrity. This idea shows us why we need not posit malice or selfishness or stupidity or a 'zero-sum mindset' to account for the Malthusian struggle that blights many aspects of human existence. Cooperation is inherently difficult, and requires social technologies both costly and fragile. Many human behaviours which seem irrational or tribalistic or just downright weird start to seem deeply logical once regarded heuristically as ad hoc solutions to prisoner's dilemmas and other coordination problems. Understanding this dilemma gives us more reason to believe that people are basically alright.

Still, if the insights of the prisoner's dilemma can be taken as representative of the kind of insights that structural critique tries to deliver, then we can perhaps appreciate some of the _prima facie_ appeal of humanism. Roughly, humanists construe social problems as deriving from psychological problems, whereas structuralists construe them as autonomous logical problems. On first glance, where human psychology (or its expression) may be malleable, something that can be shaped by education or practice, logical problems seem much more stubborn. Where the humanist makes concrete suggestions, it is often more difficult to articulate a practical strategy off the back of a structural critique. Many contemporary humanist tendencies on the left can be traced as a reaction to the heavy emphasis placed on structure in the political thought of the late 20th century, and the apparently futile places to which this can lead. The risk of structural critique is that it reveal the iron cage of power without providing any means of escaping it, deflating humanist ambition for the sake of nothing more than melancholic paralysis.

While the presence of a certain melancholy on the left cannot be denied, it would also be a mistake to say that structural critique can provide no guidance for action. It is true that the structuralist believes that we should look to structural dynamics rather than human actions to understand the shape of the social world, but it is also true that structural dynamics are themselves composed of human actions. For the structuralist, the proper frame in which to consider individual action is not the _consequential_ relations between actions and world, but rather the _compositional_ relations between actions and social structures. This is a far cry from the the cynicism structuralists are regularly accused of. Often what it amounts to in practice is a recommendation to _stop_ doing something, rather than a recommendation _to_ do something. So when a man has a feminist awakening after being confronted about how much space he takes up in conversations, then immediately starts charging around and talking over everyone to extoll the virtues of women's liberation, he has misunderstood the structuralist point by placing it in a humanist frame. He wasn't being asked to do something; he was being asked to stop doing something.


From the humanist perspective a recommendation to stop doing something can look suspiciously like a recommendation to not do anything, a point which perhaps accounts for the present marginalisation of structuralist thinking in mainstream left discourse (or its incoherent humanist interpretation, which amounts to the same). In stressing agency, the humanist places emphasis on the causal dimension of action, on the direct material consequences of our activities. But the significance of stopping or refusing or negating is one that shows up foremost in the _communicative_ dimension of action, that stressed by the structuralist. You need only consider the arguments that break out over questions of 'awareness raising,' or whether protest movements should attempt to leverage marketing techniques, or whether effective political organisation is possible on social media, to see the conflict between these two dimensions of action play out.

The great point of convergence between structuralist critique and decision theory is the idea that the possibility of collective action is tightly enmeshed with the communicative dimension of individual action. The production of a collective subject is not just a question of what individuals do, but how those doings are socially articulated within the communication structures that stage them. It is with this insight that the structuralist can resist the cynical inference of the humanist (that social problems imply psychological problems), without undermining their own ability to recommend concrete courses of action.




<!-- ## References
{% bibliography --cited %} -->
