---
layout: post
title: "Transcommunism"
date: 2021-11-23 05:23:00
categories: [baudrillard]
published: false
toc: true
---

This post collects a few thoughts stimulated by Adam Wadley's essay _Transcommunism in the Transpolitical Age_, which is a valiant effort to draw out some of the constructive recommendations latent in Baudrillard's work. This is a project I'm very much on board with, and rather than being critical these thoughts rather represent my own attempt to put similar points in my own words, and hopefully through doing so to raise some clarifying questions and foreground various points of potential interpretative ambiguity. While the common impression of Baudrillard as a fatalistic or nihilistic thinker is certainly incorrect, the constructive elements of his thought are also some of the most slippery, and anything which helps us get a better grip on them is more than welcome.

<!--more-->

But first it's worth recalling a couple of reasons why we should care about Baudrillard at this moment in time, not just as a snarky cultural commentator but as a philosopher who can teach us deep lessons about the potentials and limits of political and personal agency. As I see it there are two main ones:

1. He was right. Anyone familiar with Baudrillard can't not have noticed how the dynamics he returns to repeatedly (even obsessively) throughout his work have only continued to intensify, often to ludicrous degrees, especially in the years since the financial crash of 2008. The kind of Trumpian antics that the news media has fumbled after with terms like 'post-truth' are the bread and butter of Baudrillard's structural critique, and his writings from the 1970's read like they could be describing Twitter. The sheer prescience of this body of theory gives us good _prima facie_ reasons to take its analysis and recommendations seriously.

2. This claim is probably more contentious, but the sense I have is that many political strategies based on different frames of analysis have now either dried up or run aground---I am thinking particularly of those inspired by orthodox Marxism, the Freudo-Marxism of e.g. Marcuse, Foucault, and Deleuze and Guattari. Not only was Baudrillard an early critic of all of these frameworks, his objection was more or less the same in all cases: they all attribute productive capacity to a single, positive principle, effectively excluding the role of negativity in the genesis of social structure. In orthodox Marxism this manifests in the labour theory of value and the dialectic of use-value and exchange-value that flows from it; in Freudo-Marxism this productive role is transferred onto the libido; in Foucault onto power; in Deleuze and Guattari onto a depersonalised affect. In positing a productive principle prior to any kind of social or discursive exchange, these frameworks find themselves---according to Baudrillard---in a strange complicity with what would later be called neoliberalism, itself defined by a similar productive positivity. Baudrillard's consistent critical stance towards these philosophies makes him well-placed to help us learn the right lessons from their failures.

## 1. Baudrillard's Transcendental Sociology

### 1.1 Poetics

One of the key lines of argument pursued in the essay concerns the emphasis placed by Baudrillard on poetics. This is seen as a consequence of Baudrillard's somewhat mysterious claim, approached from various angles throughout his work, that "it is impossible to speak _meaningfully_ about anything." If meaning is impossible, then poetics is envisaged as a discursive act which somehow avoids this pretence of meaningfulness.

I agree with this, but there's a potential trap here worth highlighting. On one construal the argument might be this: if we can't speak _of_ it, then we can at least gesture _at_ it. On this model, poetry provides a different means of contact with the ineffable, one which bypasses all the lumber of categories and concepts to bring one into a direct (i.e. unmediated), felt experience of that which can never be conceptually captured. Poetry is here privileged precisely because it is seen as lying outside the game of meaning altogether, connecting directly at the level of affect or experience. This line of thought places poetry in parity with both mysticism and apophatic theology.

I do not think this is Baudrillard's position. One reason is that the appeal to this pre-conceptual field of affect or experience, which could somehow be accessed or revealed through poetic intervention, would itself be regarded by him as suspect: another meaning effect. But more importantly, I think he has in mind something far more radical and destructive. If meaning is always illusory, a mere staging effect, then the poetic act for Baudrillard is not the act which _avoids_ this illusion, but that which _dissolves_ it. Poetry is not the production of a different kind meaning, nor is it an attempt to side-step meaning by provoking an unmediated contact with Being---it is instead the _pure destruction of meaning_.

We can make point clear by considering some of Baudrillard's own examples.

> And so the cruel story of the woman to whom a man has written a passionate letter and who asks in her turn: "What part of me seduced you the most?" To which he replies, "Your eyes," and receives by return mail, wrapped in a package, the eye which seduced him. {% cite FS -l 120 %}

On the following page, a comparison is made between this scenario and "Harpo Marx showing a real swordfish instead and in place of the password 'swordfish.'"

If we concede to Wittgenstein that meaning is use, then to describe an utterance as meaningful is to say that it obeys the rules of a language game. But what we find in both examples is something that problematises this: a move which conforms to the _explicit_ rules of the game at the same time as breaking an _implicit_ rule. That a move be judged as valid depends on all players having a shared understanding of the rules, but what these examples indicate is that the explicit rules---the rules you could write down on paper---are never enough to exhaustively specify _all_ the rules. In other words, the rules of a game are always underdetermined by their representation. At least some aspect of the game must remain implicit, or in Baudrillard's words: enigmatic. In these terms, the poetic act can be understood as a move in a game which transgresses the enigmatic rule but which cannot be challenged under the jurisdiction of the explicit rules. It is to make what Baudrillard elsewhere calls an 'impossible exchange'---in effect it destroys the game, at the same time announcing the beginning of a new one.

Another example comes from Brechtian theatre: the technique known as 'breaking the fourth wall.' In the normal operation of the theatre, the audience are separated from the fictional space of the stage, like outsiders from another dimension looking in on a world which cannot look back. It is this illusion of separation that makes a 'realist' theatre possible, a theatre which can be judged by an abstract critic on the basis of its fidelity to reality (a judgement which would make no sense in the case of the vaudeville, the pantomine, or the Chinese opera, in which the audience are treated as participants in the narrative space). The displacement of the audience to a view-from-nowhere is a condition of their perception of a fidelity relation between the representation on stage and the reality it purports to represent. The moment a character addresses the audience directly the illusion collapses---the audience is then confronted with a simple fact of a human in front of them, and themselves as occupants of the same textual plane. As in the other examples, what we are faced with here is the collapse of a meaning effect. In this we can glimpse the logic behind Baudrillard's assertion that "the symbolic is neither a concept, an agency, a category, nor a ‘structure’, but an act of symbolic exchange and a social relation which puts an end to the real, which resolves the real, and, at the same time, puts an end to the opposition between the real and the imaginary." {% cite SEaD -l 133 %}

One final example, this time more personal to me. I studied mathematics as an undergraduate, and some of the most mysterious and revered constructions encountered in this field are those establishing an equivalence between results in seemingly unrelated domains, for example that some open problem in model theory is equivalent to another open problem in computational complexity (in that a solution to one of them would also provide you with a solution to the other). A peculiar feature of these equivalence results is that the process of coming to understand them is not so much an experience of learning something _new_ as of learning one thing _less_. You come to see that what seemed to be two radically different things had in fact been the same thing all along. Here also there is an implosion of meaning: there's an illusional quality to this shift in perspective, often accompanied by a sense of astonishment. It is not simply that something which had been there is suddenly gone; what disappears is something which _had never been there_ and _could never have been there_. This is a radical form of disappearance which leaves no gap, absorbing the very space in which the illusion was staged. Here we begin to centre in on what Baudrillard has in mind when he talks about the 'illusional nature of reality'.[^1] This experience of a "change in the way that things had always been" is what connects this illusionality to the concept of fate, as related in the tale of _Death in Samarkand_ from Somerset Maugham's play _Sheppey_, to which Baudrillard returns several times {% cite S -l 72 %}. In this fable, a merchant's servant sees Death in the market of Baghdad and immediate runs away to Samarkand, terrified it is an omen of his demise. When confronted by the merchant on why he had menaced his servant, Death replies that he had intended no harm---he was just surprised to see him there, since he an appointment with him that evening in Samarkand. Here the fundamental paradox of fate is on display: it is the servant's voluntary actions which ensure events unfold the way they always would have.

The point of rehearsing all these examples is to get a better handle on Baudrillard conception of poetics, and hopefully to ward off some tempting misreadings. What we find is a complex interaction of multiple elements: the rule, the enigma/secret, impossible exchange, illusion, fate---a confluence collectively named by his master concept: seduction. To a casual reader of Baudrillard, particularly the later work, these terms may seem to operate primarily as stylistic devices, the affectations of a cultivated trickster aesthetic. But this is not right---these elements are the result of a fine-grained effort to pick out the different aspects of a logical structure.

### 1.2 Simulation

This business about the illusional nature of reality invites paradoxical talk, and it is awfully easy to get tangled up saying things like 'meaning' and 'power' both do and do not exist. For this reason I propose making a distinction which can help to clarify matters, between what I will term _substantial_ and _effective_ reality. Something has substantial reality if it exists independently of our subjective attitudes; it has effective reality if it has causal influence in the world. Substantial reality implies effective reality, but the reverse is not necessarily true. Indeed, Baudrillard's paradoxical formulations can be read as picking out precisely that class of phenomena which possess effective reality _without_ possessing substantial reality. Meaning is an illusion, but it still has a profound influence on the way we organise our world. Power is an illusion, but it can still kill you. It is this notion of an 'effective illusion' which marks the domain of simulation proper.

This idea is not original in itself, and underlies most forms of social constructivism. But perhaps no-one has unravelled the consequences of this logic more than Baudrillard. One of its simpler versions, originally analysed by Hegel and later termed 'fetish' by Marx, can be illustrated by the example of the divine right of kings. The authority of the king is, in reality, the product of a social relation---the only reason the king commands a _de facto_ authority is because it has (at some level) been acknowledged as legitimate by those over whom it is exercised. However, the king's subjects do not see things this way. To them, the authority of the king is independent of their subjective attitudes, perceiving it rather as a natural property of this particular person, akin to the colour of his hair or the size of his feet. This is the fetishistic misrecognition: a social relation is treated as if it were a natural property, ontologically prior to (and therefore not contingent on) anyone's subjective attitudes. The paradox here is that it is precisely its mistaken treatment as a _substantial_ reality that institutes the king's authority as an _effective_ reality.

There's a strange circularity here: the social relation is only instituted as an effective reality on the basis of its misrecognition, but it is only in virtue of its effects that there is anything to be misrecognised. This circle or 'short-circuit' is key to Baudrillard's thinking on simulation, and can be approached with a more contemporary example: the use of game theory in neo-classical economics. A common objection goes like so: by modelling humans as rationally self-interested actors, economists make false assumptions about human nature. We are intrinsically neither rational nor self-interested, the objection continues, and so building our economic institutions on the basis that we are is sure to lead to failure. Economists are rarely impressed by this reasoning. They reply that they are concerned not with human nature but with human behaviour, pointing to reels of empirical data showing that in the sphere of exchange humans generally do conform to game theoretic predictions. Since this is the sphere they aim to study, their modelling assumptions are justified. The question of human nature is moot.

But a further counter-response to the economists can be made, which could be called the argument from simulation. This position maintains that while the empirical studies are not flawed, what they are measuring is the _effects_ of the economists' models, not some pre-existing reality which is only later theoretically reflected in them. Because these models are what are used to build our economic institutions (property laws, antitrust laws, professional norms, and so on) they actively produce a situation in which people are systematically penalised for doing anything other than reasoning as if they were game theoretic actors. So of course they do. In effect these models materialise their own presuppositions, and to treat them as justified on the basis that they converge with them is to become caught in a short-circuit of self-legitimation.

Rational self-interest is here portrayed as a simulation effect: it exists as a behavioural reality, but not in any sense that precedes its modelling. It is rather the reproduced _from_ the model, within the scope of which it is portrayed as a prior state of affairs, a sleight of hand which serves only to secure its own alibi or 'reality principle.' As with the king's authority, the paradox is that the simulation remains effective to the extent that we mistakenly sign up to its reality principle---which is to say, the economists retain _de facto_ legitimacy to the extent that their models are taken to reflect a basic reality, which allows for the practical implementation of the models which then materialise the behaviours that propped up the illusion in the first place. "The simulacrum is never what hides the truth---it is the truth that hides the fact that there is none."---so begins the phoney epigraph that launches _Simulacra and Simulation_, falsely attributed to the Ecclesiastes. {% cite SS -l 1 %}

Simulation effects like those described above depend crucially on the fact that we are creatures of symbols, beings in whose nature it is to coordinate on the basis of shared maps.[^2] It is on this basis that social reality takes on this peculiar inverted quality in which the map actually _produces_ the territory---a causal short-circuit corroding the intelligibility of any representation relation between them. On this reading, simulation is illusion put into play as an operational reality. This illusion remains operational to the extent that it is treated as a substantial reality, which is to say insofar as the map from which the territory is reproduced is misrecognised as its reflection (whether accurate or inaccurate, faithful or deceptive).

What would collapse the simulation is the exposure of this reality principle as illusion---as insubstantial, an artefact of our subjective attitudes. This is the role envisaged for the poetic or 'seductive' act: if the reality principle is the secret rule which the game depends on, then the poetic act is the lawful transgression which reveals this secret as _contentless_. To take an example, if the commodity form of value is instituted as an effective reality precisely to the extent that we collectively buy into its reality principle---use-value as the ultimate referent of exchange-value---then the Marxist critique, which maintains that within the market system exchange-value is necessarily taken as an end in itself and will therefore systematically fail to deliver use-values, actively _sustains_ this effective reality by ratifying its reality principle (albeit in an inverted form). To dissolve it, what is required is an intervention which exposes as a sham the very notion that the exchange-value of a commodity need ultimately be moored in its use-value, what Baudrillard describes as the 'absolute commodity' {% cite FS -l 116 %}: an object so self-reflexively useless and vulgar which nevertheless functions as an exemplary exchange-value, an object of pure speculation whose weightless circulation defies any attempt to ground it in a utility.[^3]

Nevertheless, simulation is not conceived by Baudrillard as something necessarily bad. In fact this 'operationalisation of illusion' is the very phenomenon that underwrites our self-constitution as symbolic creatures, providing all the flora and fauna of what Wilfrid Sellars' called the 'manifest image': meanings, desire, intentions, norms, rules, relations of lordship and bondage. But what is crucial for Baudrillard is that simulation is always accompanied by its inverse process: seduction, the poetic act of dissolution which simultaneously collapses the old simulation and establishes the opening gambit of the new one. This reciprocal dance between simulation and seduction is what he calls 'metamorphosis,' a term denoting the entirety of the symbolic process. One of the major challenges in reading Baudrillard is separating his general theory of the symbolic (what I might be tempted to call his 'transcendental sociology') from its application to specific historical circumstances. (There are always two things happening in Baudrillard, both an attempt to theorise the conditions of possibility of communication---and therefore of meaning, obligation, the social relation, etc---and to explain why these conditions are no longer being met. It from the combination of these two elements that the paradoxical and apocalyptic tone suffusing his writings derives.) As I read him, what is distinctive about the present moment is not that reality is now simulated where previously it was not, but that the reciprocity between simulation and seduction has been broken. We are now, Baudrillard tells us, caught within a historical situation in which the seductive side of the dance is indefinitely deferred, forever displaced by some diabolical sleight of hand. The effect of this deferral is both a failure of metamorphosis and metastasis of simulation, a sort of fractal proliferation of simulations within simulations which are no longer able to collapse and reconstitute themselves on the basis of a new rule. The impossibility of seduction therefore marks a certain crisis of novelty.

### 1.3 Agency and Symbolic Death

With all the pieces laid out on the board, it becomes possible to start drawing out the implicit theory of agency in Baudrillard's work. In Adam's piece this is approached through a specific kind of poetic act: symbolic death. Symbolic death does not necessarily imply a loss of biological life, but is to be understood rather as "a confrontation with radical uncertainty." What is the link between radical uncertainty and agency?

To see how Baudrillard might answer this question we need to understand agency in terms of metamorphosis: as something which emerges in the dance between simulation and seduction. Some ideas from the Kantian tradition can help clarify matters here. For Kant, what distinguishes action from mere behaviour is that an action is something one has _reasons_ for. On this model agency is understood as a normative capacity: to be an agent is to be capable of taking on distinctive kinds of rational commitment and to exercise distinctive kinds of rational authority. In short, behaviour becomes action only when it is brought under the jurisdiction of a rule---when it is situated within a normative space of reasons.

According to the outline I gave above, simulation is a mobilisation of an illusion to open up exactly such a normative space. Simulation sets a game in motion, and the rules of this game define a space of possible action, an ideal Player---we could say the simulation materialises a particular 'structure of agency.' Action, then, on Baudrillard's view, is action only insofar as it is localised within a normative space established as an effect of simulation. But if this were the whole story, it would provide a rather impoverished view of human agency, because it would seem to imply that all actions are pre-programmed in advance, already exhaustively constrained by the very same rules that frame them as actions. Just as true power in a referendum lies not with voters but with whoever gets to write and interpret the list of options, so true power in a game lies not with those who _conform_ to its rules but with whoever gets to _write_ them in the first place.

This is where seduction comes in, for seduction denotes the moment at which the rules of the game are turned against themselves, or in Baudrillard's phrase, reversed---the move which simultaneously collapses the game and establishes the new rule that announces the next one (which is then perceived retroactively as the rule that had been in play all along: the fatality of seduction).[^4] Seen from the point of view of agency, seduction---whose possibility lives in the necessary gap between the explicit and implicit rules of any game, the underdetermination of the latter by the former---thus represents the capacity of the agent _to change its own structure_. In this capacity we can locate the distinctive characteristic of Baudrillard's subject, who is not merely the player of a game whose rules have been fixed in advance, but the participant in an eternal and 'open' game where the rules themselves always remain on the table as stakes to be played for.[^5]

Here the connection between seduction and symbolic death becomes clear: the moment of seduction always marks a metamorphosis in the structure of agency. It is both the death of the subject as it was constituted by the old simulation and the initiatory birth of the subject as constituted by the new one. Read this way, Baudrillard's emphasis on symbolic death bears an affinity to the Hegelian theme of self-constitution through sacrifice. An example, given by Robert Brandom in his recent work on Hegel's Phenomenology, is the samurai code of Bushido.

> It required ritual suicide under a daunting variety of circumstances. To be samurai was to identify oneself with that ideal code of conduct. In a situation requiring seppuku, either the biological organism or the samurai must be destroyed, for the existence of the one has become incompatible with the existence of the other. Failure to commit biological suicide in such a case would be the suicide of the samurai, who would be survived only by an animal. The animal had been a merely necessary condition of the existence of the samurai (like the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere, which is important to us, but with which we do not just for that reason count as identifying ourselves.) No doubt even sincere and committed samurai must often have hoped that such situations would not arise. But when and if they did, failure to act appropriately according to samurai practices would make it the case that one never had been a samurai, but only an animal who sometimes aspired to be one. One would thereby demonstrate that one was not, in oneself, what one had taken oneself to be, what one was for oneself. The decision as to whether to risk one’s actual life or to surrender the ideal self-conception is a decision about who one is.  {% cite ASOT -l 238 %}

The symbolic death of the biological animal is also the symbolic birth of the samurai, an act of self-constitution (metamorphosis) achieved by staking one's biological life. (Note the fatal quality of this act: if when those circumstances arise one fails to commit _seppuku_, one proves that the stake had never been a real stake, thus _making_ it the case that one _had never been_ a samurai.)

While symbolic death need not coincide with biological death, or even the risk of biological death, the extremity of this example, in which the act of self-constitution takes the form of a radical negation of the life instincts, illustrates how symbolic death is always also a confrontation with radical uncertainty. Paradigmatically, this requires placing oneself under an unconditional obligation. To do so is to put something at stake---what makes the uncertainty radical is that one can never anticipate or estimate the future costs or benefits at the time of placing one's bet. The risk is unquantifiable (not even in principle). Symbolic death is not an 'irrational' act, in the strict sense of being enacted despite an unfavourable cost-benefit analysis. It is rather 'arational,' in the sense that it is enacted in the complete absence of any criteria that could support a meaningful cost-benefit analysis. It is therefore incompatible with any logic of investment. In this respect, Baudrillard's symbolic death is similar to Kierkegaard's leap of faith. These rational criteria are absent precisely because symbolic death is an act of metamorphosis, of self-constitution: what is prospectively for the prior subject may become retrospectively rational from the point of view of the new subject produced as a result of the act. This follows the logic of the Spartacus effect: the first escaped slave to stand up and say "I am Spartacus" necessarily places their life in a radically uncertain danger, but at the same time this act provides the credible signal for others to do the same; as more do so the risk drops to zero. But this is a judgement which could never have been made prior to the initial leap of faith. It is this radically uncertain act---performed by individuals---which institutes the community of slaves as a collective subject, which then retroactively absorbs these actions into its own sphere of rational agency.

## 2. The Disappearance of the Social

### 2.1 Intro

In this final section I'll consider the bearing of these points on the contemporary situation. As mentioned in passing, on this reading Baudrillard does not see our present social reality as simulated where previously it might not have been---social reality has always been simulated---but instead as defined by a certain breakdown in the reciprocity of simulation and seduction, caused by the suppression of the latter. This undermines the symbolic process of death and rebirth which represents the subject's capacity to change its own structure, the capacity which is constitutive of agency proper. Metamorphosis is blocked; simulation goes into metastasis. Somehow a sleight of hand occurs, a tacit deferral ensuring the confrontation with radical uncertainty is always already postponed.

How can this be unpacked? We can begin by considering a few strategies that might be inferred from a 'face value' reading of Baudrillard. I am thinking in particular of that quintessential 'postmodern' trope: irony. Not only is irony a topic Baudrillard treats with approval in several places {% cite PW -l 29 %}, but it also fits in neatly with the description of poetics given above. If I dress like an 80's nerd ironically I am both presenting a style and implying that there is nothing at stake in a style, that it is no more than an arbitrary costume. To be ironic is to play the game in a way that implicitly mocks its presuppositions---does this form of irony not then qualify as a legitimate poetics? Indeed, couldn't many tropes from 1990's culture and arts be taken in parity with Baudrillard's recommendations? Does Damien Hirst's notorious artwork _For the Love of God_---the staggeringly garish platinum skull studded with no less than 8601 diamonds---not perfectly embody the fatal strategy of the absolute commodity, for instance?

These examples appear to present us with a problem. Because it must be confessed that from the heady vantage of 2021, none of these strategies look particularly promising any more. Postmodern irony and self-reflexivity did not open up a new space for self-creation beyond the homogenising reach of mass media. Instead they were appropriated by advertising, like the surrealist techniques that came before them. Hirst's skull did not send the art market into a symbolic death spiral. Instead he got rich, and now we have NFTs. No-one has ever actually broken the internet, and despite the promises of countless sci-fi films we are yet to encounter the message that can destroy its medium.

### 2.2 Two Fated Strategies: Drag and the Absolute Commodity

Responding to this challenge calls for a more nuanced reading of Baudrillard, which in certain cases will mean reading him against himself. The absolute commodity is instructive here. The aim of the gambit is a seduction, a game reversal: by making tangible the sheer speculative weightlessness of the commodity it mocks the false alibi of utility---the very illusion that allows the social practice of market exchange to continue to function as effective reality. On this front Hirst's skull cannot be faulted: it plays this move faithfully and with a singular flare. But it still does not work. Why not? If we read his earlier writings, I believe we find the answer provided by Baudrillard himself: it reverses a game that is no longer in play. A point made repeatedly by the Baudrillard of the 70's is that entire dialectic of use-value and exchange-value, which belongs to the game described by the 'commodity law of value,' is no longer active---it has been absorbed as a 'satellite' by an entirely new situation, one which obeys a different logic. This is what he called 'the structural law of value,' which defines the symbolic economy of the postmodern situation (for want of a less ambiguous term). Under the commodity law of value, the commodity pretends to be a utility. This is the pretence exposed by the absolute commodity. But under the structural law of value, the commodity does not pretend to be a utility---it _pretends to pretend_ to be a utility. In Baudrillard's language, it is a 3rd-order simulacrum. But if this is the case, then the absolute commodity does nothing to reverse the game. In fact by exposing the first pretence it will only become complicit in the second pretence, effectively propping up the illusion that the commodity was pretending to be a utility.

The threat to this argument can easily get confusing, and is worth reiterating with a second example. For this we can turn to Judith Butler's theory of gender performativity, as explored by Victoria Grace in her book _Baudrillard's Challenge: A Feminist Reading_. In Butler's treatment gender is understood as something like a simulation: not unreal but insubstantial, an effect of its performance rather than something which precedes it as its referent. "This social reiteration of gender through the repetition of discursive acts serves to create the fiction of a 'natural' reference point which precedes and underpins the material realness of sexual difference." {% cite grace-baudrillard -l 61 %} This bears some resemblance to the role of the commodity under its own law of value: where the commodity pretends to be a utility, so the performance of gender identity pretends to be the expression of a prior natural fact. In Butler this analysis is pushed into the service of an emancipatory project, whose aim "is to subvert '(gender) identity' through exposing the fiction of its 'natural' underpinnings." {% cite grace-baudrillard -l 61 %} One mode of subversion emphasised by Butler is parody, and specifically drag. This idea of playing with gender as montage, as mask, as a theatre, aims to subvert by foregrounding, amplifying and reversing the performative dimension of gender to such a degree that it is exposed _as_ performance, mocking the very notion that gender identity is anchored in a natural referent.

Clearly this has much in common with the absolute commodity, and as such will share its limitations. As Grace puts it,

> If Butler's analysis is couched in apparently universally applicable terms, there is a danger that her contemporary claim of subversion might in fact be historical. In other words, a subversive strategy designed to parody sexual difference with a view to undermining its anchoring in the ontological inevitability of anatomy is indeed subversive when the dominant structuring of gender difference does rely on such a natural reference. If, however, we accept Baudrillard's claim regarding the loss of the great 'natural' referent [...], then the subversive character of the exposure of the fictive nature of the 'natural' underpinnings of gender difference at this precise historical juncture is less compelling. To claim that there is no 'true gender identity' might no longer be attacking the roots of the structural configuration of gender in the contemporary hyperreal era. {% cite grace-baudrillard -l 61--62 %}

The claim of Baudrillard's referred to is that of the passage from the commodity to the structural law of value, after which representations (of gender, value, authority, truth, etc) no longer legitimate themselves on the basis of fidelity to this 'natural' referent. That impetus behind this claim can be demonstrated with advertising. ([Source](https://bettermarketing.pub/the-campaign-that-saved-old-spice-d925bed9aee8) for stats on this ad)

{% include youtube.html id="owGykVbfgUE" %}

There's a certain form of criticism which still insists on treating this as straightforward pretence: as an attempt to sell the product on the basis of a fictional 'true masculinity.' This type of critic imagines their task as exposé, to lay out in revealing detail the mechanism by which this 'true masculinity' is constructed as an effect of discourse, including the covert messaging in advertising. But one glance at the above advert shows something amiss with this line of thought. It is so obviously self-conscious and self-mocking. There is no 'covert' messaging, no latent discourse to be brought out by careful critique. It presents no 'true masculinity,' but something more like a drag masculinity, where the object of parody is precisely that older form in which the pretence was presented in earnest. It pretends to pretend. But just as the effortless absorption of Hirst's skull by the art market presents a problem for the absolute commodity, so this example presents a problem for Butler's project of subversion. Because if the parody of gender through drag truly does subvert its structural configuration, then how is it so easily mobilised by advertisers to sell gender targeted products? Is the advertising industry to be welcomed as an ally in the struggle for liberation from gender identity? Or are we to conclude that the structural configuration has changed, and that advertisers are simply one step ahead of the game in their exploitation of it?

### 2.3 The Society of the LARP

The manner of failure of these two strategies (including one suggested by Baudrillard himself) reveal the inner workings of the structural law of value---the rule of the game corresponding to the _present_ form of simulation. They each treat as pretence what is in reality a pretence of pretence, in effect writing its own alibi for it. In this we begin to how this game performs the sleight of hand that indefinitely defers its reversal. It is a subtle form of misdirection in which the dead simulations of the past are resurrected in drag---games within the game, the pretence within the pretence---set up only for the sake of their theatrical reversal. It provides a simulation _of_ seduction, which is now freed from the burden of its confrontation with radical uncertainty. The problem with Hirst's skull is not, then, that it fails to reverse the secret of the commodity form, but rather that it does so almost _too_ perfectly, with a kind of aesthetic attention to detail only possible from a position exterior to it---a position of non-participation, a position with no live stake---just as it is only possible to admire the rattlesnake's scales when one is no longer inside the tank with it. Baudrillard made a similar point about Foucault: "Something tells us---but implicitly, as if seen in a reverse shot of this writing too beautiful to be true---that if it is possible at last to talk with such definitive understanding about power, sexuality, the body, and discipline, even down to their most delicate metamorphoses, it is because at some point _all this is here and now over with_." {% cite baudrillard-foucault -l 30 %}

Against the background of this analysis, 'postmodern irony' can be seen as something of a transient form, a last-ditch attempt to protest a structural configuration that had not yet fully taken hold. Irony is the attitude appropriate to the society of the spectacle, to an audience of passive observers still capable of understanding themselves as such. But this is an image still under the spell of the natural referent, even though in this case it is only felt through its absence, in the mourning for a lost real. But the passage to the structural law of value represents something far more radical: the dissolution of the auditorium itself, the very external space that gives the spectacle its determination _as_ spectacle. With the loss of auditorium the audience also lose their ability to grasp themselves as spectactors. Instead they are recast as characters on the stage, plunged into the hyperreal form of participation: the society of the spectacle becomes the society of the LARP.

> Today this critical energy of the stage---not to mention, of course, its power of illusion---is in the process of being swept away. All that theatrical energy goes into the denial of the scenic illusion and into anti-theatre in all its forms. [...] Illusion is proscibed; the scission between stage and audience is abolished; theatre goes down into the street and into everydayness; it claims to invest the whole of the real, dissolve into it, and at the same time transfigure it. [...] This is no longer the famous Aristotelean catharsis of the passions. Rather, it is a treatment of detoxification and reanimation. Illusion is no longer valid here: it is truth which bursts into free expression. We are all actors and spectators; there is no more stage: the stage is everywhere; no more rules: everyone plays out his own drama, improvising on his own fantasies. {% cite FS -l 62--63 %}

In this new mode past taboos return only to be transgressed, and dead forms of power are resuscitated only to be unmasked. In all cases it is the absence of any real stakes in the game which allows them to be played to extremes, just as the hand can be played with more daring and flare when there's only matchsticks to lose. You call yourself a Marxist-Leninist and define yourself against an industrial order that no longer exists, in the name of a proletariat that no longer exists. You make a career as an artist with your subversive critiques of hidden exploitation in the art world---for this the art world pays you gladly. Advertising sells you a self-consciously performative masculinity; you wear it as a trad aesthetic, or deconstruct it in the name of gender liberation---it doesn't matter which, since both are pre-programmed characters in the LARP. The mood that pervades the hyperreal form of participation is no longer the irony of the disenchanted spectator, but irony-not-irony (which is identical to sincerity-not-sincerity).

### 2.4 The Secret Rule of Postmodernity

What are we actually describing here? What _is_ the structural law of value, exactly? As argued earlier, for Baudrillard agency is linked to the possibility of game reversal. But from within any particular historical situation, metamorphosis can only be achieved by a reversal of the game that actually corresponds to its structural configuration. The structural law of value blocks metamorphosis by a misdirection at precisely this level, deploying a hyperreal arcade of phoney games, an endless shadow play. But the question we must ask is this: what is the nature of the outer game, the game corresponding to the structural law itself, the _only_ game that is being played for real stakes? What is its secret rule?

Baudrillard has already told us the answer, in the passage from _Fatal Strategies_ quoted above: it is the game in which the secret and only rule is _that there are no rules_. Since this rule remains effective only to the extent that it remains secret, this game is expressed—paradoxically—in a massive over-production of the signs of commitment. One throws oneself into personal development, a political cause, a project, a hobby, an aesthetic, a thing. But the intensity of this is underwritten only by the fact that these are, in the final analysis, not really ‘commitments’ at all—they exercise no true normative constraint, provisional choices that can be reversed at any point. This is an entirely new form of simulation, based on 3rd-order simulacra specifically (a development which Baudrillard in identified earlier work as marking the era of simulation proper)—it's secret rule is not a reality principle, but what could perhaps be better termed a ‘liquidity principle.’ Its imperative does not take the form, “you should act like an x because you are an x,” but rather the form of temptation, ”you should try this because there is nothing to lose—it's just a costume, and can always be returned to the shop later.”

In all of this, the principle of non-obligation could equally be interpreted as a principle of universal equivalence—to say that one is never obliged by one's chosen signifiers is to say that these signifiers are infinitely exchangeable. In this respect, the true spirit of this game is to be found not in any particular signifier or game, but in the moment of exchange itself, the moment at which one costume is removed and replaced by a new one, the very indeterminacy between them. It no longer matters whether you believe in astrology or think that it's nonsense, the _jouissance_ of this game is located precisely in the fact that this question no longer has relevance—one is free to maintain the mantle scientific seriousness in one context and don the trappings of the occult in another. Nor is one expected to provide a rational synthesis which renders them compatible. They exercise no normative constraint over one another whatsoever—to question this inconsistency is, within the context of this game, to commit a _faux pas_, to betray the knowing wink that authorises this equivalence of opposites. On this reading, what is at issue is not the _metaphysics_ of truth—whether there is some fact of matter, or even could be some fact of the matter—but that the social-linguistic practice corresponding to the categorial concept of representation has now been absorbed by a different one, in which the pact between representation and represented (the demand that the former be held to the tribunal of the latter) has been broken. What replaces it is a passion for exchangeability as such.

The extent to which Baudrillard breaks with the spirit of Marx's original analysis is a complex question, and I won't attempt to untangle it here, but it's worth briefly noting how the above line of thought interlinks with the matter of commodification. Fredric Jameson once described postmodernism as “the consumption of sheer commodification as a process” {% cite jameson-postmodernism -l 4 %}, and Baudrillard's elaboration of the structural law of value is very much in parity with this formula. If commodification is the process in which what is singular and unique is severed from its contextual entanglements and circulated on the market, or abstracted as a model so make possible its repetition, then what Baudrillard has described is just the application of this process to itself. What is abstracted is the process of abstraction, which loses sight of its singular original as the object of consumption shifts to abstract repeatability as such. It is for this reason that the serial form takes on such weight in postmodernity, sheer repetition-with-variation that only pretends at fidelity to an original, singular referent. This logic of seriality is almost tangible in Instagram accounts, where, as social media sharks know well, success rides entirely on the capacity of the series to hang together _as_ a series, rather than on the qualities of its terms taken alone. It is the logic demonstrated perhaps most clearly in the paintings of Andy Warhol, analysed extensively by both Baudrillard and Jameson.

### 2.5 Reversing the Game

It would be easy to keep unpacking this forever. Certainly, Baudrillard's theory of 3rd-order simulacra and the structural law of value present a uniquely rich framework for explaining many of the contradictions of the present media environment, as well as cultural and political life in general---contradictions which have only been amplified since his death in 2007. But our present concern is the question of agency, and for this we must ask: how is this game to be reversed? How does one break its secret rule? We've put enough scaffolding in place to give a clear answer to this: if the secret rule is that there are no rules, then the way to reverse this game is simply to _observe a rule_. It doesn't matter which. Within the situation governed by the structural law of value, the only true subversion is the recognition, in practice, of an unconditional obligation.

This suggestion may seem to align Baudrillard with kind of conservatism. To see that this is not the case, we must make a distinction on which Baudrillard places great emphasis. This is the difference between the rule and the law:

> Ordinarily we live in within the realm of the Law, even when fantasizing its abolition. Beyond the law we see only its transgression or the lifting of prohibition. For the discourse of law and interdiction determines the inverse discourse of transgression and liberation. _However, it is not the absence of the law that is opposed to the the law, but the Rule_. {% cite S -l 131 %}

The difference between rule and law is a difference between two conceptions of authority. The law exercises authority regardless of whether it is acknowledged as authoritative by those over whom it is exercised. Conservatism operates on the basis of the law, with 'tradition' typically taken as the locus of _sui generis_ authority. One has one's obligations, regardless of whether or not one takes oneself to be obligated. To fail to recognise one's obligations is, on this model, to be _factually_ incorrect, to be in a state of cognitive error. In contrast, a rule is purely conventional. It exercises authority only to the extent that it is recognised as authoritative by those over whom it is exercised. The rule is much more closely associated with what we would usually think of as a game, where there is no prior fact about whether one is obliged by the rules or not. It makes no sense to ask whether the rules of chess are intrinsically authoritative—either you are playing the game or you are not, and to cheat is simply to no longer be playing. To transgress a rule is meaningless.

The interplay between rule and law can be illustrated by returning to the earlier example of the divine right of kings. Recall that at the level of reality, the king's authority depends on its being treated as legitimate by his subjects—it has the structure of a rule. But paradoxically, the king's authority is instituted as a rule precisely in virtue of its misrecognition as a law. This law takes the form of a reality principle, or the fiction of a natural referent: the king's authority is seen as a natural property, independent of the subjective attitudes of those over whom it is exercised. While Baudrillard is not a conservative, he does help us to understand why it is that conservatism exercises such a strong political draw at the present moment. Social reality is constituted by rules, not by laws. But under certain circumstances, as the example of the king demonstrates, the imposition of a law is an effective way to institute a rule. The force of conservatism's appeal to tradition as a source of law lies, then, in its potential to reinstitute the rules that have been liquidated by the structural law of value, reopening a space for real stakes and thus for self-constitution.

But just as Baudrillard helps us to grasp the contemporary appeal of conservatism, he also tells us why ultimately it must fail. The problem is that in its appeal to the law, it tries to institute the rule by installing a reality principle, a fictional ‘before’ of society that wields a unilateral authority over it, a kind of Platonic ideal of tradition from which its norms derive their force. But this appeal to a natural finality of the law is precisely what is rendered ineffective by the structural law of value, under whose jurisdiction referentiality itself lives only a kind of phantom existence. As such, conservative traditionalism is easily absorbed as one more character in the LARP, as demonstrated in the nostalgic cosplay of online ‘trads’ adopting an aesthetic of 18th century rural life fabricated by advertisers in the 1950's. The power of Baudrillard's critique is that it accounts for the failure of both conservatism (with its emphasis on traditional law) and liberalism (with its emphasis on the liberation of individual desire), two political projects that appear to occupy opposite polarities, in a single breath: they both fail to institute the social pact because the installation of a reality principle cannot perform this function under the structural law of value. Desire is the mirror image of the law.

If this is the case, then what is required is not a rule whose authority is established only on the basis of its misrecognition as a law, but a rule recognised as a rule: whose authority is explicitly understood as conditional on its recognition. One example of how this might work is the Kantian concept of autonomy. On this model, one is bound by the rules one applies to _oneself_. For Kant, the capacity to bind oneself to a rule is the practical ability that forms the basis of our discursive subjectivity, the thing that makes us beings capable of self-creation. This model is inherently individualistic, with the authority of the rule established as a matter of immediate self-relation: my own subjective acknowledgement of the rule is understood to directly institute its authority over my action. Recently this model has enjoyed something of a popular revival among wellness practitioners and self-development programs, as with Jordan Peterson's tidy-ur-room indictment that a meaningful life can be achieved only by first taking on a responsibility to oneself. If the way to recover a space for self-constitution under the structural law of value is truly to be found in the observance of a rule, then this would seem to be a promising avenue. (Once again, we can see that Baudrillard helps diagnose the popularity and controversy surrounding figures like Peterson.)

But this model also has its problems, and understanding these problems will help to tease out some of the more subtle aspects of Baudrillard's theory of agency, namely the role played by otherness and the 'dual' relation.








## References
{% bibliography --cited %}

## Notes

[^1]: A phrase comparable to Lacan's assertion that 'truth has the structure of a fiction.'

[^2]: Some of Baudrillard's most dubious moments occur when he tries to apply the logic of simulation to the physical sciences. Points which seem deeply insightful when made of the media, polls, or social sciences suddenly seem extremely flaky when applied to electrons. The source of this disparity is, to my mind, the simple fact that unlike people, electrons are not the kind of things which coordinate around maps they apply to themselves. Only discursive beings, who are always partially constituted by their self-conceptions, can make themselves different by taking themselves differently.

[^3]: A possible example of this might be Damien Hirst's art piece _For the Love of God_, the diamond-encrusted skull whose stratospheric value is based on nothing more than the fact that it self-reflexively comments on the art object as a pure commodity.

[^4]: Godel and Badiou. As with the paradoxical "this sentence is false" (perhaps more accurately: the move which conforms to the syntax of the game but which cannot be incorporated by the game's semantics)

[^5]: This point was present early in Baudrillard. See his discussion of 'the collector' in The System of Objects.
