---
layout: post
title: "Rex Butler on Baudrillard"
date: 2021-07-14 05:23:00
categories: [baudrillard, ]
published: false
---

I've finally had a chance to read Rex Butler's book Jean Baudrillard: The Defence of the Real (1999). This one has been on my radar for some time, and many seem to agree that it's one of the most subtle readings of Baudrillard's work, including the man himself (no small accolade). Here I'll just gather some loose quotes and notes.

Butler stresses in the introduction that his aim is to provide what he calls an "internal" reading of Baudrillard, by which he means to read him in his own terms. This is a response to prior critics, who Butler judges to have begged the question against Baudrillard. Often these readings assumed that Baudrillard was engaged in a kind of critique with the same aims as traditional Marxist critique, i.e. to describe the true physics of power and thereby pierce the illusions of ideology. But as Butler points out, the immediate conclusions of Baudrillard's early attempts at this sort of descriptive analysis were that the very relationship between illusion and reality has changed---in an important sense it has itself been assimilated into the operation of power---and that the traditional mode of critique can therefore no longer gain purchase. By continuing as if it could one in fact becomes complicit in the functioning of the new system, in effect by producing an alibi for it. Baudrillard's critique of critique, then, forces him to adopt writing strategies which break radically from those of prior criticism. Those who complain that Baudrillard's theorising fails by the standards of traditional critique are missing what is at stake in it completely.

As far as Butler's reading goes, what this means in practice is that a strong emphasis is placed on _methodological_ paradoxes that arise for Baudrillard at various points, allowing him to draw out an interplay between content and form that gives a kind of rational coherence to Baudrillard's corpus as a whole. This is certainly one of the strengths of the book, and why Butler's reading is more subtle than others. However, I can't help but also feel that he wraps himself up in knots with this in the end. There's a lot of this kind of stuff in the book:

> However, if simulation is irrefutable, if any outside to it is only conceivable because of it, at the same time the statement that makes this possible also makes it impossible. The very statement which means there is no outside to simulation, that simulation is total, also means there is an outside to simulation, that simulation is not total.

I wouldn't want to hang too much on this yanked-out-of-context paragraph, but it's indicative of this kind of portentous vibe---really distinctive of secondary literature from the 90's---that comes with dwelling on these issues of self-reference, how can the theorist theorise the limits of theoreticity, all that stuff. The end result is that Butler's reading has this almost Derridean tint to it, in which the driving force in Baudrillard's work is portrayed as this tail-chasing attempt to grapple with the paradox of trying to represent that which is necessarily excluded in the act of representation. There's certainly some truth to this, but I think it misses or at least blurs something important in both the strategy of Baudrillard's writing and its content, which I think are much more entangled with contingencies of cultural context than this reading allows.

Perhaps I can make that clearer by contrasting what I think Baudrillard's concerns are with Derrida's. There are certain similarities between them: they are both interested in systems of meaning, in both their limits and their conditions of possibility. Moreover they both suggest that there is a deep, inextricable link between them, that meaningfulness is possible only when systems contain gaps, undecidabilities, zones of under-determination. But where they perhaps differ is that Derrida is primarily interest in these questions at the most general level---in the limits and conditions of systematicity as such (and uses particular cases to support this inquiry)---whereas Baudrillard is primarily with the possibility of meaningfulness in the present moment, in the systems of meaning we _currently_ inhabit (and appeals to the general case to give shape to his analysis of the present).
