---
layout: post
title: "Contemporary Leftism and the Politics of Affluence"
date: 2022-02-13 05:23:00
categories: []
published: false
---

I've had a number of not-particularly-fruitful discussions recently which have had me thinking about the shape of the current political landscape, and I'd like to outline some thoughts on this here. Much of this stems from my own dissatisfaction with contemporary leftwing thought and strategy. I'm speaking here as someone leftwing in orientation, by which I just mean that I hold these two commitments: that questions of social justice (like structural racism and gender liberation) index real problems and are legitimate focal points of political struggle, and that capitalism, in virtue of its essential structure, presents an impasse to be overcome (which is not to say that it is a universal badness and the root of all evil—more on this later). While I do not take the validity of these goals to be in question, I do want to consider how some theoretical aspects of leftist thought are inhibiting rather than facilitating their realisation. Specifically, my contention is that leftism has not adequately integrated the empirical lessons of the last decade and a half of political life, namely the successes of right-wing populism, nationalism, and some related cultural phenomena. This has left it with an inadequate response to the situation we are actually in.

We can cut a path into this tangle by first considering the matter of affluence in modern societies. One of the distinguishing features of leftwing politics is, of course, its focus on the problem of _uneven access_ to the sphere of affluence—call this the _**inclusion problem**_. Affluence is here considered not simply as a measure of financial wealth, but in the broader sense encompassing quality of available healthcare, access to higher education, affordable public transport, free time, welfare, and so on. While the 20th Century saw a huge expansion of the sphere of affluence in both the West and elsewhere, the ways of being partially or totally excluded from it remain numerous: the systematic barring of access to certain social institutions for minorities, chronic poverty in the developing world necessitated by the outsourcing of externalities in the global economy, white-collar wage-slavery, gig economy precarity, and so on. But in addition to the inclusion problem, the current situation presents a variety of discontents which seem to have arisen instep with affluence itself: purposelessness, consumerist excess, status anxiety, the loss of integrity of the public sphere, and so on. All of which is painfully familiar by now—let's call it the _**meaning problem**_.

We can compare different positions on the political spectrum by considering how they might understand these two problems and the relationship between them. At the centre of this field is something I'm going to call _**liberal quietism**_. The liberal quietist acknowledges the existence of zones excluded from the sphere of affluence, but does not believe that the exclusions are necessitated by systemic conditions. Rather, they take it that the sphere of affluence will continue to grow in step with the ongoing march of globalisation, as free markets continue to provide technological solutions to climate change and the like, perhaps with a little technocratic tweaking here and there: in short, that the inclusion problem will resolve itself within the parameters of the current system. On the meaning problem, their stance is similar: the liberal quietist may acknowledge its existence, but they deny that it is a public matter. Once affluence has been achieved, the purpose one finds in life is strictly one's own business: while the affluent state may extend resources to better equip the private individual in their quest for purpose—a smaller working week, subsidised psychotherapy, etc—the question of meaning itself simply belongs to a different sphere. The meaning problem may be a spiritual or a psychological problem, on this view, but it is not a political problem.

By _**leftism**_ I mean to refer to the continuum of views that includes and runs leftwards from the Bernie/Corbyn variety of social democracy, including modern approaches to economic equity such as MMT and UBI, all the way to things like Fully Automated Luxury Communism. What these positions share is the view that the inclusion problem is insoluble within present parameters, and that it therefore demands a systemic response. The required systems change may be envisaged in terms of an overhaul of economic infrastructure, or in state intervention in structural oppression, or in the removal of legislative factors in structural oppression, or more often some combination of all of these. But in the first instance, what differentiates this whole continuum from liberal quietism is the demand for systems change in response to the inclusion problem.

So what is the leftist take on the meaning problem, insofar as there is one? This question is not so easy to answer. One fairly common strategy seems to be to try to _identify_ the meaning problem with the inclusion problem. On this view, the “affluence” offered by capitalist economies is a radically constrained affluence: most people may have hot water, on demand access to twenty different world cuisines at any given moment, and a computer in their pocket, but all this comes at the price of a massively over-stimulating environment and stressful daily grind which puts a hard ceiling on practically achievable levels of flourishing. The suggestion is that if only these extra constraints were abolished then the meaning problem would take care of itself—it judges the problem to be a matter of insufficient affluence, rather than bound up with affluence itself. If this is so, then it doesn't actually have any disagreement with liberal quietism with respect to the meaning problem. All disagreements are located on the inclusion problem: leftism and liberal quietism would disagree radically about what constitutes affluence and how to achieve it, but agree that this exhausts the political question: as far as the meaning problem is concerned, the best politics can do is create the material conditions under which individuals are free to pursue private ends. It is perhaps not surprising, then, that recent years have seen the emergence of movements which combine leftist (or leftish) politics with ideas about spirituality or developmental psychology. The aim of the political project is to secure universally inclusive material conditions which will enable spiritual or psychological developmental to finally proceed unhindered. This division of project (which maps onto a division between public and private spheres) is one shared with the liberal centre.

What would a leftism that treats the meaning problem as a properly political problem—distinct from the inclusion problem—look like? I shall return to this question, but for now we can bring its stakes into focus by considering how all this looks from the right.
