---
layout: post
title: "An Obligatory Jordan Peterson Poast"
date: 2022-01-16 05:23:00
categories: [capitalism, deleuze, desire, marx, vitalism]
published: false
---

I'm a bit loath to do this as I try to avoid culture wars stuff like the deathly anthrax that it is, however in the case of Jordan Peterson I can't shake the sense that the symptom he represents is far from finished being read and integrated, especially by the left. I made a [Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/divinecuration/status/1412385714063515652) which laid out some broad thoughts on this a while back, and figured it's time to exorcise this demon for good. I'll consider what are commonly taken to be some good criticisms of JBP and why they don't quite manage to find their mark, some broader political questions this points to, and finally some positive responses that can be drawn from these thoughts.

<!--more-->

I want to begin by considering an aesthetic objection to Peterson which I believe prefigures something much deeper. This is the familiar complaint that he's just too goddamn serious. All that quivering intensity and table-thumping and order and hecking chaos stuff? A bit gauche bro. Consider this widely shared Contrapoints video:

{% include youtube.html id="4LqZdkkBDas" %}

I bring this one up as it's often been presented to me by those with whom I live and breath the same political air as exemplifying a good response to Peterson, or at least to the cultural situation he has come to represent. There's two threads running through this video. One is a sincere attempt to empathise with Peterson's fans and consider both what is appealing in his ideas and their flaws. The other—and this is what I will focus on—is a recurring daddy joke in which Wynn adopts an affectation of fawning submission addressed to a sexualised image of a dom Peterson in standard issue three-piece pinstripe. The joke mocks Peterson's seriousness as an attempt to occupy a position of paternal authority, doubly barbed in light of his vocal opposition, which first thrust him into public view, to campus regulations requiring academics to address students using their preferred pronouns.

What does it take to find this joke funny? What do you have to believe to interpret it as a legitimate burn? We've already said it: it is the perception that Peterson speaks from a position of paternal authority (I'll put aside the gender dimension for the moment, as the second barb of the joke ultimately bootstraps off the sting of the first). And this is what makes Peterson gauche, a certain awareness that being addressed in a voice of such quivering intensity is to be addressed by someone who is trying to directly _place demands_ on you. Could anything be more cringe than that? This is not just a question of Peterson's intentions, conscious or unconscious, but of the broader cultural dynamics in play that have created the conditions for his rise to fame and notoriety. Peterson's daddy act is successful, it is implied, because out there are loads of men in desperate need of a father figure. This is reflected in the substantial line of Wynn's argument, which is explicitly empathetic to this social position. But what is curious is that when taken in totality, the video addresses its viewer as dis-identified with this desire for the paternal command, because that is what it takes to be in on the daddy joke. The gaze of the viewer constructed by Wynn's meticulous composition is thus structured by a kind of duplicity, officially registering as empathetic for a social position at the same time as implicitly disavowing it as gauche. The effect is that the message is never quite addressed to that person with whom it claims to empathise.

Before turning to what this gets wrong about Peterson, I'll briefly give one more (much less subtle) example of this kind of duplicity. Recently there's been some controversy around the status of developmental stage theories in political metamodernism and its adjacent spaces, where theories of adult psychological development have often been recruited to inform projects of social change. The controversies have been multifaceted, questioning whether stage theories are true, whether they're good, whether they're descriptive, whether they're normative, whether they're officially descriptive but tacitly normative, or whatever. Without getting too deep into the details, what caught my attention was [a reason given](https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=1199720657209567&id=100015149321507) by Hanzi Freinacht—a caveated stage theory proponent—for why they are good:

> Stage theory helps non-judgment: if someone has a crude opinion (Trump supporter, ethnocentrism, mainstream consumerist capitalism, etc.), it’s due to a lack of the privilege that supports growth, not to an inherent flaw of the person. Remove the developmental perspectives, and you’re back where Hillary Clinton started: “The basket of the deplorables!”

What's staggering about this is how it presents itself as empathising with the very social position it insults in the same breath. As if going up to someone and saying “no no you have it all wrong, I'm not _judging_ you for being an imbecile, I know that it is only due to happenstance that you have turned out such a blithering idiot” is somehow going to help change their mind. It won't, obviously—it makes no difference whether the attributed crudeness is understood as intrinsic or circumstantial: to take the position (or person) as crude before the fact is to have already excluded them as an equal party in rational exchange. Freinacht's position here fails to frame the other as a person, treating them more like errant wildlife in need of management. The fact that it does _this_ non-judgementally is no achievement to be proud of: it is easy to be non-judgemental about someone who has been excluded from the sphere of full personhood, because it is only through inclusion in this sphere that one becomes subject to the norms and standards against which judgement becomes meaningful in the first place. Here we find the same duplicity as before, the voice which ostensibly occupies a position of empathetic identification while implicitly othering its target.

<!-- This kind of duplicitous voice has been prominent in recent progressive and leftwing causes (the Remain campaign in the lead up to the Brexit vote was an extremely vivid example), and the fact that it is still with us is a measure of how little the progressive imagination has been able to understand what it's been getting wrong. It is no surprise at all that the popular image of the educated progressive as a dead-eyed professional bent on administering other people's perceived crudenesses is very much alive and well. -->

Back to Peterson and Contrapoints, then—what is the problem? It is not just the duplicity of the gaze directed at his fans, but a more fundamental misdiagnosis of the draw that has been exerted by Peterson.
