---
layout: post
title: "On Depth and Surface (a Critique of Vermeulen and van der Akker's Metamodernism)"
date: 2022-04-26 05:23:00
categories: [metamodernism]
published: false
---

In this post I'll take a critical position on Timotheus Vermeulen and Robin van der Akker's metamodernism. This is something I've been chewing on for some time, and gives me a chance to unpack some of the thoughts I could only gesture at in [Against Metamodernism](https://samuelludford.medium.com/against-metamodernism-51be3cbbe751), a text more polemical and broadly targeted than I intend this one to be. It's probably worth saying at the outset that my impulse to take issue with metamodernism (in the broad sense) is framed by a background of agreement: in neither the identification of the cultural phenomenon associated with this term, nor in the perception of its significance for our present cultural condition, will you find any quibbling from me. My problems all lie further downstream, with the way this phenomenon has been read—in what it has been understood to represent or to herald or, at a deeper level, to be.

In the case of Vermeulen and van der Akker (henceforth V&V) the situation is somewhat complex, because—as I shall be arguing—the level at which they perform the reading is left ambiguous, and the question is rather what is left occluded by the ambiguity. In their 2017 book _Metamodernism: Historicity, Affect and Depth after Postmodernism_, the authors outline their project in the broadest possible terms:

> As we have defined it, metamodernism is a structure of feeling that emerged in the 2000s and has become the dominant cultural logic of Western capitalist societies. We use the term metamodernism both as a heuristic label to come to terms with a range of aesthetic and cultural predilections and as a notion to periodise these preferences. In other words, this book is neither a Greenbergian plea for a specific kind of art nor a Jencksian pigeonholing of individual architects. It is an attempt to chart – in much the same way Jameson has done for postmodernism – the dominant cultural logic of a specific stage in the development of Western capitalist societies, in all its many forms and disguises. It is an attempt, however flawed, to come to terms with today’s condition as well as its culture, aesthetics and politics, by way of the arts. {% cite vv-meta -l 32 %}

In this book and elsewhere, most famously in their earlier essay [Notes on Metamodernism](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.3402/jac.v2i0.5677), V&V describe the various facets of this structure of feeling, which I'm sure most people likely to be reading this will be familiar with: oscillation between modern commitment and postmodern detachment, metaxy, informed naivety, pragmatic idealism, depthiness, and so on. I will pick up some of these threads at various points throughout this post. But to begin with I shall spend some time dwelling on this quoted passage, because in my opinion these seemingly innocuous words contain in embryonic form a problem which foreshadows something much bigger.

The argument will run like so: first I shall take issue with the way V&V employ Fredric Jameson’s concept of a cultural logic, and specifically in the way they relate it to Raymond Williams’ concept of a structure of feeling. In this relation I shall suggest that something essential to Jameson’s project is left out. I shall then make some motions towards filling this gap, by outlining a Jamesonian account of postmodernism as the cultural logic of late capitalism. The effect of this will be to provide an alternative way of reading metamodernism, which will throw into question the extent to which it can be thought of as distinct from postmodernism. I'll argue instead that the rise of the metamodern structure of feeling is better understood as representative of a deepening of the postmodern condition. I'll support this claim by considering three TV shows—Arrested Development, Modern Family, and BoJack Horseman—in light of themes developed by Vermeulen in his e-flux article on [The New “Depthiness”](https://www.e-flux.com/journal/61/61000/the-new-depthiness/).

The goal is to bring to the fore a certain ambiguity that runs throughout V&V’s work. Once looked squarely in the face, what its presence reveals is that they cannot possibly live up to the task they set themselves: namely, to do for metamodernism what Jameson did for postmodernism, or to come to terms with today's condition as well as its culture. On the contrary: in their ambiguity V&V have paved the way for what has become a familiar (though not uninteresting) misreading of our present cultural condition. By tracing the contours of this misreading, I believe that we can come to a more nuanced understanding of the situation we are in.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/basanta-1.jpeg' '<a href
="https://adambasanta.com/soundsnotheard">Sounds not Heard, Adam Basanta 2017</a>' %}

## A Structure of Feeling is not a Cultural Logic

What I'd like to highlight is the way V&V treat ‘cultural logic’ as synonymous with ‘structure of feeling.’ I think this is a mystifying sleight of hand—these concepts are different, in a subtle but important way. Lying behind this distinction, which may appear terminological and pedantic, are deep questions about what a cultural analysis is and what it should be able to do. Getting straight on them is essential if we are to understand the scope of the historical thesis presented by V&V.

Williams introduced the notion of structure of feeling into cultural theory in the 1970’s, a time when Marxian categories were more commonly used in the humanities than they are now. One of these was the distinction between base and superstructure. A reductive version of this distinction had often been invoked in attempts to understand cultural phenomena as directly and exhaustively determined by economic relations, and Williams saw this as problematic. He argued that when looking only at existing economic relations the cultural condition will be visible only insofar as it has already taken shape, as a series of “formed wholes rather than forming and formative processes.” This is like studying a disease by ignoring the symptoms and peering directly into the bloodstream—at best one can gather an inventory of its traces and molecules, a snapshot of the disease from the perspective of tomorrow’s yesterday. What gets left out is any sense of the disease as a dynamic and evolving system. By turning attention to the structure of feeling of a culture—to those qualities of experience found in cultural products, aesthetic forms, public life and the media, domains which had previously been disregarded as ‘superstructural,’ as mere symptoms—Williams was attempting to redress this balance.

Of course, what he was not doing was identifying a cultural condition with its structure of feeling. A disease is not its symptoms, even if it cannot be understood while ignoring its symptoms. He was not trying to get rid of the distinction between determining base and determined superstructure—after all, Williams was a dyed in the wool Marxist himself—but to find a more nuanced way of expressing their relationship. A dynamic cultural condition is best approached indirectly, in terms of its structure of feeling, because it is here that it is registered in its dynamism. Equally, a cultural condition may in its dynamism witness changes in its accompanying structure of feeling, just as a single disease may be accompanied by a progressing suite of symptoms. Williams was quite clear on the distinction:

> For what we are defining is a particular quality of social experience and relationship, historically distinct from other particular qualities, which gives the sense of a generation or a period. The relations between this quality and the other specifying historical marks of changing institutions, formations, and beliefs, and beyond these changing social and economics relations between and within classes, are again an open question: that is to say, a set of specific historical questions.

Here we see (at least) two layers: the quality of social experience and relationship (the structure of feeling), and the social and economic relations (the situation or condition itself). And crucially, the relationship between these layers is a separate, historically contingent question. This is important to bear in mind, because Jameson’s concept of a cultural logic is located on the second side of this divide, not the first. A cultural logic is an economic relation, one that pertains specifically to the cultural and public spheres, something like a rule that governs their political economies (Jameson also uses the phrase ‘hegemonic norm’). A cultural logic is the principle that orders the production, consumption, and distribution of symbols, images, and ideas.

For an example of the kind of thing Jameson had in mind, we need look no further than the saying—one I shall return to shortly— that “all publicity is good publicity.” This phrase expresses the content of a social practice; it describes a norm of how representations are traded and acquire public value. It is a very different sort of thing to what Williams’ had in mind by a structure of feeling, though of course a cultural environment structured by this norm will likely possess a distinctive structure of feeling. If Jameson’s writings on postmodernism are taken as a whole, what we find is a paradigm example of what Williams’ was recommending: a study of structure of feeling used as a window on a cultural logic still in the process of formation. It is on these grounds that Jameson could be said to be coming to terms with a condition as well as its culture.

But in V&V we only find half of this. When they identify in various cultural products their common theme of pragmatic idealism, or informed naivety, or a certain oscillation between two other structures of feeling, they are doing exactly that: describing a structure of feeling. And this they do extremely well, by way of a dizzying and persuasive array of examples. But what they then do is conclude, without hesitation or intermediary argument, that this new structure of feeling is also a new cultural logic. For them this is simply to say the same thing. But all this really means is that they say _nothing_ about the cultural logic, in the Jamesonian sense—at no point do they attempt to draw any inferences about the social relations that constitute our cultural situation, or about its political economy. The lacuna represented by this forced synonymy recurs in various guises in their writings, a sort of dead space that must be slid over in silence. For instance, in _Notes on Metamodernism_:

> The postmodern years of plenty, pastiche, and parataxis are over. In fact, if we are to believe the many academics, critics, and pundits whose books and essays describe the decline and demise of the postmodern, they have been over for quite a while now. But if these commentators agree the postmodern condition has been abandoned, they appear less in accord as to what to make of the state it has been abandoned for.

What exactly is it that they are claiming has been abandoned? On the one hand they might be talking about _postmodernism_, in the sense of a set of cultural tropes, artistic and theoretical strategies, styles, and all the qualitative or experiential aspects of these things. This seems be what they mean when they refer to pastiche and parataxis. But on the other they might be talking about _the postmodern condition_, in the sense of a particular configuration of social relations structured by its own distinctive norms, and to which postmodernism in the arts emerged as reaction and symptom. Is the claim just that postmodernism has been abandoned? If so then this does not imply the postmodern condition has also been abandoned—perhaps postmodernism has been abandoned precisely because it turned out to be an inadequate response to a condition which still grips us. Or perhaps the claim is what it appears to be: that the postmodern condition _itself_ has been abandoned. But if so then how does a description of an emerging structure of feeling support this? How do we know it’s not just a progression of symptoms? What could it mean to abandon a condition, anyway?

Another, more subtle example can be found in the complaint they raise (also in _Notes_) against Nicholas Bourriard's altermodernism, a complaint similar in certain respects to the one I am raising against them. They object that while Bourriard has identified several emerging moods and aesthetic strategies in the arts, he sweeps aside the question of what unites them, mistaking “a multiplicity of forms for a plurality of structures.” They conclude, quite rightly, that Bourriard “perceives that the form and function of the arts have changed, but he can't understand how and why they have changed.” But what V&V offer instead—namely a description of the metamodern structure of feeling, the family resemblance that lies behind the multiplicity of forms—does not move them to the level of explanation either. All they do is replace Bourriard’s fragmented taxonomy with a consolidated taxonomy. It is as if Bourriard has found kangarooes and platypuses, and V&V have discovered that these species belong to a common family, but neither have anything to say about how and why there came to be so many weird marsupials in Australasia. For this an entirely different order of analysis is required.

Both examples speak to a conflation of cultural condition with accompanying structure of feeling. What we'd really like to know is this: does the rise of the rise of the metamodern structure of feeling mark the advent of a new, metamodern condition, or a new set of responses to an old condition? What’s curious about V&V is the way they manage to displace this question entirely, apparently taking it for granted that it has to be the first. At this stage, however, I suspect this objection may still feel rather academic. To illustrate what is at stake in this omission, let us see what happens when something is put in it.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/rice-1.jpg' '<a href="https://vimeo.com/298879155?embedded=true&source=video_title&owner=3500695">Environment Built for Absence (screenshot), Tivon Rice 2018</a>' %}

## The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism

It might be considered suspicious that, for two theorists claiming to “chart […] the dominant cultural logic of a specific stage in late capitalism,” V&V remain strangely silent on the topic of capitalism itself. But however it is for them, this is certainly not the case for Jameson, a heterodox Marxist often accredited with making the link between capitalism and postmodernism most explicit. By exploring this dimension of Jameson’s thought—the political dimension quietly jettisoned in the project taken up in _Notes_—we can uncover a new means of understanding and evaluating the recent transformation in the arts that V&V describe so well.

While Jameson’s positioning of postmodernism as the cultural logic of late capitalism is well known, less so is his articulation of the content of this logic. Perhaps the most concise formulation appears in the introduction to his 1991 collection of essays _Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism_, in which he glosses postmodernism as "the sheer consumption of commodification itself as a process." It is worth noting first of all that this formula can properly be said to encapsulate a cultural logic: it describes the organisational form of a social practice. Postmodernism, Jameson thinks, is commodification commodified. To understand what this means, we must understand both what kind of reconfiguration in social relations is implied by a process of commodification, and what it might mean for this process to be applied to itself.

To become a commodity is to become purchaseable, that is to say exchangeable for money (or some other universal equivalent) on an open market. The easiest way to illustrate what this implies is to consider an object that cannot be purchased. Take a wedding ring, for instance. You cannot buy someone else’s wedding ring. Or more accurately: you can buy it, but it will then be nothing more than a ring. The symbolic value of the wedding ring cannot be traded on the open market just because it is not contained in the ring itself, but rather in the fact that the ring indexes a particular relationship in the life of its wearer, an index sealed by social ritual. The value of this object is intrinsically bound up with its particular social context, but since purchaseability requires that it be indifferent to context, it cannot be purchased. But let us imagine, for a moment, that one day we collectively chose to ignore this. Say instead that we adopted a new social practice in which we treated the wedding ring as if its symbolic value could travel with it, as if rather than being indexed to a particular social context it were indexed to a property of the ring itself. Let us call this fictional property ‘marriageness.’ We _could_ do this, of course—it would not even require that we actually believed in marriageness, only that we believed that others believed in it, or believed that they believed that we believed in it. Or perhaps not even that—as long it were tacitly understood that this is the game everyone is now playing there would be no obstacle to the valuation of wedding rings on the basis  their perceived levels of marriageness, to creating speculative markets in marriageness, marriageness derivatives, and so on.

Absurd though this scenario may be, something like it does seem to be prevalent in consumer markets. The example of the wedding ring is vivid, both because the exchange of wedding rings is one of the few remaining customs that has not yet been subsumed as market activity, and because a wedding ring is a purely symbolic object: its physical properties are mostly irrelevant to its symbolic function. But for many other goods the situation is more complex, with their value being bound up both with their material properties (which can travel across contexts) and their social-symbolic significances (which are bound to particular ones). Food is extremely illustrative here, with food branding and marketing often aimed at providing a tiny supplement of simulated social entanglement–think of smoothie packaging that tries to joke with you, the labels of niche honey jars explaining in earnest detail their producer’s bee-keeping philosophy, or the carbon offset cost in a Starbucks latte which allows you to buy the fulfilment of your ethical obligations as part of the product. These supplements all speak to something which is necessarily lost in the indifference of commodity exchange, namely the indexing of material goods to the particularities of social context. In the Marxian jargon this process is known as ‘real abstraction.’ It is an abstraction because it is fundamentally a process of de-particularisation, the decoupling of a product from its context of production so it can be repeated across different contexts of consumption. This abstraction is said to be ‘real’ because it is not something that happens explicitly in our minds, but implicitly in our practices: in the act of exchange under universal equivalence. Just as speculation on marriageness does not depend on anyone believing in marriageness, so the claim is not that people really confuse parasocial relations with objects for social relations with people—what matters is just that in their economic activity they act as if they do.

There is an enormous amount of subtlety and disagreement in the literature on real abstraction, but for present purposes this can be bracketed. What’s important is just that commodification essentially involves the abstraction of an object from its particular context as a condition of its repetition or circulation across different contexts. Rereading Jameson’s formula in light of this Marxian background, what it suggests is that postmodernism in its essence is a matter of double abstraction—or the abstraction of abstraction—in which the very process of becoming-repeatable is itself presented as an object of consumption. To see what this has to do with postmodernism, we need only consider the paintings of Andy Warhol.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/warhol-marilyn.jpeg' 'Marilyn Monroe, Andy Warhol' %}

If there is a certain poignancy in Warhol as an exemplary postmodern artist, it is important to recognise that it is not simply because he invented a new artistic form, as if it were pulled from nowhere, but that in this form he made explicit a cultural logic that was already implicit in the emerging practices of advertising, marketing and PR. It is the logic under which images are no longer valued for their successful representation of something outside the world of images, but become valued simply _as_ images, in a manner that begins to float freely of what they represent. And this is just what is meant by the double abstraction, in which pure abstraction as a form is made independent of any particular abstracted content—this is why it does not particularly matter whether it is Marylin Monroe or a tin of soup that is repeated. This is the same logic that Jean Baudrillard expressed in the idea of a functional substitution of the real for its representation, or that lies behind the claim that Samuel L Jackson is the canonical postmodern actor because he only ever plays his own persona. It can be seen in pastiche (described also by Jameson as ‘bland parody’), in which the signifiers and affects of other times and cultures are used like off-the-shelf aesthetics to be endlessly spliced and remixed without heed to their historical or narrative functions.

This logic of double abstraction is also at work when it is said that all publicity is good publicity. After all, what does this formula mean if not that what attains value in the public sphere nowadays is the pure form of publicity itself, irrespective of what is publicised? This phrase is normally invoked to lament the fact that bad guys get as much airtime as good guys, but it also takes on a much wider significance that cuts to the heart of the postmodern condition. Because in a situation structured according to its rule, all rebellion or subversion is effectively impossible. As Kurt Cobain found out, nothing sells better on MTV than someone raging against MTV. This short-circuit of public representation, in which the signs of rebellion are rendered equivalent to the signs of conformity, is in many ways the defining characteristic of the postmodern condition. The cultural logic of postmodernity is one in which all contents are rendered exchangeable against each other, like so many costumes which can always be returned to the shop later. What seals the public value of any particular image or gesture is no longer its particular contents, but its compliance with a generalised curatorial form. In this sense the act of curation begins to precede the act of creation; the painting becomes less important than its frame. Public figures are increasingly overtaken by their own branding, becomimg gimmicky caricatures of themselves.

If this is what constitutes the cultural logic of postmodernity, then it is not difficult to see where the ironic element of the postmodern structure of feeling comes from. Because what this situation implies—and this can be seen most clearly in the Kurt Cobain effect—is the structural impossibility of sincerity. This is what constitutes both the futility and the self-reflexivity of the postmodern condition. Postmodernism in the arts and culture emerges as an attempt to reckon with this socio-economic situation, whether through an ironic gesture which reflects the system's inertia back at it, an attempt to make the self-reflexive loop so explicit that it breaks, or by trying to raise the stakes, for instance by responding to superficiality with hyper-superficiality.

Even this brief overview is already in tension with many things that have called themselves metamodern. For example, take Seth Abramson's reconstruction of the critique of irony made by David Foster Wallace in _E Unibus Pluram_ and elsewhere. In Abramson's version, irony is positioned in a causal role: as the underlying attitude or sensibility responsible for generating our stagnant postmodern culture. Overcoming the stagnation is thus envisaged as a matter of moving beyond this ironic sensibility—of cultivating a _new_ sensibility which will break out of the cultural deadlock. But this argument makes no sense whatsoever if the true source of postmodern stagnation is not irony, but a cultural logic defined by double abstraction. According to the Jamesonian picture I've sketched above, irony is a _symptom_ of this situation—not its cause. To cultivate a new sensibility is not to change a cultural logic. At best it is to develop a new response to it.

V&V do not make this argument, of course, or indeed anything like it, but in their case what is interesting is precisely this gap. While they present themselves as taking up Jameson’s old concerns in a new situation, in truth they present an artificially de-politicised version of those concerns, in effect limiting themselves to the description of some new ripples on the surface. Ultimately they tell us nothing about the situation itself, and certainly do not provide any grounds for judging it to be a genuinely _new_ situation, despite the bombast of their rhetoric, which strains to make it seem as if it must be. Nowhere do they offer any kind of answer to the question asked earlier: does the rise of the rise of the metamodern structure of feeling mark the advent of a new, metamodern condition, or a new set of responses to an old condition? In the next section, I'll continue to draw out the theme of double abstraction to give an answer to this question. This answer will further problematise rather than corroborate V&V’s account. I'll argue that far from indicating a breach, a shift, or a rupture in the cultural logic that defines postmodernity, the rise of the metamodern structure of feeling is better understood as its culmination.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/berger-1.jpeg' '<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7wi8jd7aC4">Ways of Seeing, Episode 3. BBC 1972</a>' %}

## The Metamodern Structure of Feeling

But what of the metamodern structure of feeling? So far I have said nothing about this, other than to argue that its emergence does not in itself provide reason to believe there has been a change in the dominant cultural logic. But if we agree with Vermeulen and van der Akker that this new structure of feeling has emerged (as I do), then the question remains as to what exactly is going on here. In the final section of this post I'd like to sketch an answer this question which builds on the theme of double abstraction. And in essence, the answer is I think quite simple: the rise of the metamodern structure of feeling corresponds to the moment at which the cultural logic of double abstraction achieves _total_ dominance. In the 1990's its hegemony was incomplete, and the ironic mode can be read primarily as a last ditch attempt to protest it. By bringing one's public presentation into line with systemic cynicism, one recovers a kind of paradoxical sincerity at the level of self-representation.

As I've argued, the logic of double abstraction entails a certain loss of participatory agency, a displacement of the postmodernised subject to the position of a passive observer, _even in relation to their own actions_. This is the essence of the Kurt Cobain effect. Irony is best understood as the voice which tries to preserve the interiority of this inherently passive space, even as it recognises its own passivity—it is, in a manner of speaking, the heckling voice that rings out from the auditorium of the society of the spectacle. It belongs not just to the self-consciously wallowing superficiality of postmodernism in the arts and popular culture, but also to that peculiarly 90's phenomenon once known as ‘alternative’ culture—whether represented in the weaponised melancholy of prog-rock, the extreme aesthetic renunciation of black metal, or the collectivised hedonism of rave. What has happened in the intervening years is that this space has itself been absorbed by the monoculture: the structural displacement is so complete that the auditorium can no longer be experienced as a collective space at all. The accompanying transition in structure of feeling reflects an acceptance of the fact that all exits are now sealed: rather than a lament for the loss of participatory agency, the mood is now positively reframed as an emancipation from the burden of participation. In popular culture this manifests—paradoxically—as a casting aside of cynical gimmickry and its replacement by a huge simulacrum of participatory earnest. One is now free to act and believe and express with impunity precisely because the principle of non-obligation has been universalised: the society of the spectacle has become the society of the LARP.

{% include youtube.html id="ThXGrdgw9sk" %}

The central claim here is that, far from the postmodern cultural logic having changed into something different, it has in fact been naturalised. Historically this checks out: if we were to identify the technological shift that correlates to the difference between the postmodern and metamodern structures of feeling, it would without doubt be the transition from television to social media. But doesn't this shift simply represent the extension of all-publicity-is-good-publicity dynamics—once the province of a remote public sphere that we could all laugh at together from the living room—into all areas of life? It is true that the shift away from television has often been cited as a reason to believe that postmodern frames of cultural analysis are no longer adequate to the present situation, and that newer (perhaps metamodern) categories are required to understand the cultural milieu shaped by these new media. But this claim cannot possibly be substantiated without an account of the cultural logics embodied in these technologies. Are we looking at a genuine shift, or merely a spread? If the television era saw double abstraction installed as the dominant cultural logic, as I am arguing, then clearly what we are seeing in the social media era is the elevation of this dominance to the level of a hegemony. In the 90's it was a rising tide; now it is the ocean we swim in.

{% marginfigure 'mf-no-brand' 'assets/img/blog/no-brand.jpg' '' %}
{% marginfigure 'mf-not-chicken' 'assets/img/blog/not-chicken.jpeg' '' %}
{% marginfigure 'mf-xr' 'assets/img/blog/xr-1.jpg' '' %}

One of the striking things about revisiting the canonical postmodern theorists at this point in time—and I am thinking here particularly of the writings of Lyotard and Baudrillard from the 1970's—is how ludicrously contemporary they feel. They are not writing about irony or self-reflexivity; they are limning the outlines of a structural dynamic which is now most familiar under headings like ‘post-truth,’ or in Twitter interaction patterns: the very stuff that 2020's culture is made from. In fact we can go back further: in the astoundingly prescient 1935 essay _The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction_, Walter Benjamin infers from some basic reflections on the relationship between photography and perception a variety of cultural effects we would now identify as postmodern, if not metamodern, (particularly concerning the nature of celebrity and the overshadowing of the person by their persona, as in the Samuel L Jackson effect mentioned above). What this uncanny fidelity of experience to theory suggests is that the various metamorphoses in structure of feeling experienced throughout the 20th and now the 21st centuries (and their correlative developments in communications technology) do not index equivalent metamorphoses in the dominant cultural logic. Rather, what they index is the dissolution of various frontiers of resistance as an unchanging cultural logic has become increasingly entrenched. My claim is that with the rise of the metamodern structure of feeling, what we are witnessing is the dissolution of the final frontier.

## Case Study in Two Parts

Consider two TV comedies that stand on either side of this split: Arrested Development and Modern Family. While not so far apart in time (Arrested Development originally ran from 2003 to 2006 with later revival seasons on Netflix, while Modern Family enjoyed eleven seasons between 2009 and 2020), their contrasting sensibilities are representative of a stark shift from the ironic or postmodern mode to something altogether different. (And as representative of the postmodern in this comparison, Arrested Development confirms the suspicion that the 1990's ended somewhere around 2007.)

While they differ in their intended audiences, these shows share a preoccupation with the entwined themes of family and superficiality. Arrested Development centres on the forlorn character of Michael Bluth, who, having reluctantly inherited the role of family leader when his father is sent to jail on multiple fraud convictions, has his aspirations to normality thwarted by the consistently insensitive, vacuous, or plain idiotic demands of extant family members unable to grasp they are no longer rich. For Michael Bluth, the dream of living a simple life with his son is a hidden depth, one which forever eludes him as he tossed about on the shifting sands of his family's whims and neuroses, a limbo symbolised perhaps most memorably by the demo house in which he lives—a leftover from one of his father's failed housing developments—in which all the walls are fake and all the fruit is plastic. But if there is a final lesson to be gleaned from Arrested Development it is, in the end, only that the facade runs all the way to the bottom. As we accompany him through his various trials and tribulations, cracks begin to appear in Michael's character. Whether in his theatrical attempts to leave the Bluth's behind only to return before anyone notices he's gone, in his childish fury when the rest of his family side with his disgraced father against him, or in his neglect for his son as he becomes increasingly wrapped up in his own narrative, the sympathetic position initially set up for the viewer to inhabit is gradually eroded. The image of the beleaguered saint straining under the weight of impossible obligations is ultimately revealed as a product of Michael's own neurosis, with no more claim to depth than his elder brother's hopeless aspirations to becoming a stage magician, his sister's fleeting adoption of political causes as lifestyle props, or his mother's minor dramas. And there is no respite to be found in any of this—the tragic register of Michael's situation is preserved even while the viewer's identification with it is undermined. Indeed, it is precisely in this redoubling of hopelessness that the comic tension resides.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/duchamp-paris-air.jpeg' '50cc of Paris Air, Marcel Duchamp 1919' %}

In Modern Family we find a strange inversion of this world. To be sure, it too revolves around a certain self-ironising superficiality: characters are portrayed with an almost solipsistic concern for the minutiae of suburban life, their minor squabbles and short term projects seeming to provide an exhaustive inventory of their inner lives. The sense that there are nothing more to these characters than their surfaces is driven home by the use of documentary-style talking heads shots, moments in which we expect the various family members to display their hidden depths yet which more often they use only to air petty grievances and bitch about each other. Like any old sitcom, almost everyone is mysteriously good looking and anyone who isn't is refunded in smarts—but in Modern Family this gesture is made self-consciously, as if reminding us that for many a real life is simply one that aspires to be fiction. On the occasions when a character does encounter genuine strife—as when 5th grader Manny is being bullied at school—they are routinely ignored by others whose attention is focused on trivia, at least at first. Yet for all this, the overall tone of Modern Family is unequivocally optimistic. In contrast to the failures of reciprocity that provide Arrested Development with its driving frustrations, the solipsism of Modern Family does not seem to preclude a certain symmetry of relations, a mutual enfolding of everyone into the sympathetic texture of one another's lives. In Notes on Metamodernism, Vermeulen and van der Akker wrote that “metamodern irony is intrinsically bound to desire, whereas postmodern irony is inherently tied to apathy,” a distinction which tracks well against this inversion. In Arrested Development, the erosion of depth is at the same time an erosion of agency and desire. But the self-ironising superficiality of Modern Family points to something quite different: to a form of desire happily liberated from the burden of depth. In the end Manny's bullying problem is recognised and resolved, but not through any kind of moral confrontation (a depth device forbidden by the show's internal logic). Rather Manny is shown by those around him that there can never truly be any conflicts in a world made only from surfaces—haters gonna hate, you can only do you, and the correct response to friction is just to present an ever smoother and more reflective surface.

If Modern Family can be imagined as offering a lesson to Michael Bluth, it is surely that happiness will never be achieved by accessing the depths he insists on pursuing, but rather in the abandonment of this pursuit. Only once Michael stops yearning for something beyond the surface, once he stops interpreting the superficiality around him as indicative of a loss, will he be free to partake in the peculiar unity that continues to bind his family despite the fact that they're constantly fucking each another over. From this perspective, Michael Bluth is simply in need of what Vermeulen, in a 2015 essay titled [_The New “Depthiness”_](https://www.e-flux.com/journal/61/61000/the-new-depthiness/), refers to as a ‘recontexualization of terms.’ His problem is to interpret superficiality as an absence of depth. But if he were to adopt the position which sees depth as an impossibility—the position available to the viewer—then he would realise that the very contrast between surface and depth is unsustainable, that with its collapse so must go the negative connotation of superficiality. Vermeulen argues, essentially, that the apathetic dimension of postmodern irony is dialectically unstable, because it defines itself on the basis of a contrast with something whose existence it officially rejects. Taken to its full conclusion, this logic cannot help but invert: if there are no depths to be found then all that means is that there never were, that the very idea of depth was a mistake in the first place and that there is therefore nothing to contrast with it. Shedding this myth only opens us to the spontaneous creation of local and transitory spaces of involvement.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/frei-1.jpeg' 'Soap Film, Frei Otto' %}

There is undoubtedly a coherence and draw to this logic. But if we look closer, I believe we will also find something more sinister. Indeed, we can see this same inversion paralleled in other domains in which we are less inclined to see it as a blessing. When someone like Foucault comes along and says that the self is nothing more than a point formed by intersecting lines of power on a grid of signifiers, he makes it sound like a rather grim prospect. This view—which we might as well call the postmodern image of the subject—is framed in a critical key, a negation of older views which insist on the self as something more internal and substantial. But elsewhere the same point is made with the opposite inflection: in another voice, prominent now within popular culture but perhaps most familiar from advertising, the reduction of the self to its signifiers is presented as a liberation. If you are nothing more than the way you present yourself, then you are free to be anything you like. What was negated is affirmed instead. One is not bound by any obligation to the hand one has been dealt by birth and happenstance—one's tradition, culture, or even prior versions of oneself—all of these represent fungible props which can always be traded up in the pursuit of self-actualisation. By the same token, one's relationships to others take the form of contractual arrangements contingent on the mutual provision of complementary signifiers, and no more. Friend doesn't want to come out and create grammable memories, instead complains about being depressed all the time? Bad value. Family member questions whether your side hustle in natural avocado treatments helps to fuel cartel violence in South America? Haters gonna hate, shake it off. We're surely all familiar with this: it is what is in other contexts is described in the pejorative as neoliberal subjectivity. What's curious here is the similarity between the inversion that gets us from the Foucauldian subject to the neoliberal subject, and the inversion that gets us from Arrested Development to Modern Family. In my view there's a very simple reason for this, namely that they're identical. The postmodern structure of feeling is fundamentally a lament, a last bastion of resistance to the neoliberal subjectivation that is the other face of double abstraction as cultural logic. The structure of feeling displayed by Modern Family is just what happens when we stop resisting and start affirming this logic. If Modern Family is metamodern, then all this would seem to mean is that the metamodern subject just _is_ the neoliberal subject.

Let’s return to Modern Family, which conspires to hide this from us. It might be objected that people are not here treated as fungible, that its relationships are infused with a tenderness not reducible to cold transaction. But what we should remind ourselves of at this point is that there is absolutely no reason why transactions should be cold. As summarised in the quote from Girls used by Vermeulen as the epigraph to the 2015 essay, "Just because it's fake doesn't mean I don't feel it." Or to take it in the contrapositive: just because I feel it doesn't mean it's not fake. The thing about Modern Family is that its entire universe is constructed so as to never truly confront its characters with a situation in which an appeal to depth is not sought but demanded. They may be callous, superficial, or distracted, but they are never desperate, alcoholic, or violent. No-one has any issues with money; the unexpected is disruptive, but never catastrophic. Their conflicts are all the kind of conflicts that go away when you stop treating them as conflicts, because at some level they were never real conflicts. We can imagine  what might happen if we were to take the same character dynamics, the same solipsism and cheerfully aestheticised superficiality, and transpose it into a much more poor and difficult social setting, one in which people cannot be relied on to come through in the end and in which the bullies really are out to hurt you. It would suddenly turn incredibly dark. And this is why ultimately, Modern Family feels so contrived and oppressive. What it offers is a kind of utopia of subjectivity, in which one's freedom from the demands of the other are guaranteed by one's agreement to never place demands on the other in turn. But in the end this is little more than an attempt to universalise the truism that obligations can be dispensed with when there are no real needs, and which therefore depends on the contrivance of a false cosmic harmony. Its suggestion that an ironic form of desire is to be found in the abandonment of the search for depth is seen to be hollow in light of the realisation that more often it is depth which finds us.

{% include youtube.html id="WrsFXgQk5UI" %}

## Conclusion: BoJack Horseman and the Revenge of the Real

But is Modern Family metamodern? By Vermeulen and van der Akker's lights it seems to me that it must be, especially if we place it in the context of Vermeulen's dialectic of surface and depth. At any rate, it is undoubtedly an exemplar of a rising trend in popular culture which retains the ironic pastiche of the postmodern gesture at the same time as turning its negation into an affirmation. One might disagree with my assessment of this development as something sinister—as a further contraction of interiority rather than an opening up or a preservation. Or I suppose one might argue that the trend I have described is not truly metamodern. As a final word, I'd like to briefly consider this point in relation to another show that has sometimes been held up as an exemplar of metamodernism: BoJack Horseman. From the perspective of the position I have been developing, BoJack Horseman looks very different to something like Modern Family—not just in its levels of inventiveness or niche appeal, both of which are in a different class, but in its fundamental gesture.

At the end of _Notes on Metamodernism_, the authors summarise the metamodern destiny as the pursuit of a horizon that is forever receding. In Modern Family I think we can see something like this quite clearly. But in BoJack Horseman what we find is exactly the reverse: a character pursued by a horizon that is forever advancing. The Hollywood it portrays is an archetypal utopia of subjectivity, a perfectly depthy reality in which the social texture never pretends to be anything more than an aestheticised veneer yet in which diverse lifeworlds jostle and coexist nonetheless. But for BoJack, an alcoholic cartoon horse haunted by a steadily escalating string of catastrophic mistakes, traumatic experiences, and consequences of past amorality, it is no utopia at all. Rather, what dominates the show's logic is the persistent inability of this depthy reality to register the real depth that keeps intruding, condemning it to circulate forever as an unintegrated remainder. At any point in BoJack's trajectory there are two roads open to him. One is the path of oblivion, the cynical resignation to his grim fate. The other is the path of reconciliation, in which he might confront the spectres of his past and begin the long process of finding peace. What strikes me as the real genius of this show is the way that it blocks both of these paths by having them constantly metamorphose into one another. Every sincere gesture is recontextualised as a cynical ploy, and each moment of submission is undermined by an oddly intrusive kind of hope, a constant reversal of significations in which all concrete possibilities are suspended in oscillation. It is extremely telling that the nostalgic index for BoJack—his early Hollywood years as a sitcom star in the 1990's—is in material terms not so different to the present. He was already an alcoholic, already a womaniser, already a B-if-not-C-list celebrity, already wouldn't think twice about screwing his friends over. What's different about this past era is simply that it is one in which these determinations were stable, a time when one could simply inhabit one's identity as a scumbag. BoJack’s nostalgia is, in the end, a nostalgia for the fixity of signifiers. What torments him in the present is the sheer liquidity of values entailed by the loss of any depth index, the impossibility of shouldering the weight of the real in a world where the intersubjective fabric has been rewritten according to the logic of double abstraction.

<br />
{% maincolumn 'assets/img/blog/sq-trash-art.jpg' 'Squarespace Ad Campaign, 2018' %}

If this is at all right, then it seems to me that what makes BoJack Horseman so brilliant is precisely that it exposes the vacuity of the gesture made in Modern Family. If Michael Bluth is tormented by the fear that he will never gain access to the object layer, and Modern Family finds domestic peace in its dissolution of the object layer into a plurality of interlocking subjectivities, then BoJack Horseman portrays the revenge inevitably exacted by the object layer on any social reality that conspires to exclude it. Of course, some might define metamodernism differently, for instance as picking out 'whatever it is that's going on in BoJack Horseman,’ in which case if it does present a compelling critique of certain vacuous tropes in popular culture then all the better for metamodernism. This doesn't seem right to me—the wider trend that has been called metamodernism is distinctive and recognisable, even if people disagree about what it is and what it means. To my mind BoJack Horseman is something really quite unique, standing in a fundamental tension with what elsewhere has been identified as the metamodern structure of feeling. But ultimately this is not the important point, and people can use words however they like. What does seem important to me, however, is that the conceptual apparatus developed by Vermeulen and van der Akker does not possess the resources to articulate the difference. The reason is that it simply has no theory of the cultural logic, despite their protests to the contrary.

Indeed, the relationship between cultural logic and structure of feeling is a relationship of depth to surface, and their flattening of the one into the other is itself something of a depthy move. We could easily imagine a response to the present line of thought that tried to up the ante, arguing that the critical stance I have adopted deploys an outmoded (dare I say it, a modernist) mode of analysis in its appeal to the authority of the depths—to the _is_ beyond the _as if_. Vermeulen and van der Akker's praxis, this objector might suggest, is completely consistent with their theory. And they wouldn't be wrong about that. But the authors themselves say no such thing, preferring to operate in the kind of ambiguity that allows them to profess the advent of a metamodern ‘destiny’ while at the same time remaining inscrutable on what the political implications of this might be. I find it very difficult to take seriously the complaint that later attempts to mobilise the concept of metamodernism as a political vision somehow betray what Vermeulen and van der Akker had in mind, since the entire framing of their project depends on an artificial de-politicisation of Jameson’s, whose concerns they claim to inherit. I do not find it at all surprising, given the _de facto_ depthiness of their account of metamodernism, that this signifier has proved so ripe for assimilation into the textual stream of the internet, has been appropriated and spliced _ad nauseam_, mashed up with bits of developmental psychology, complexity theory and spirituality, constantly resurfacing in newer and more bastardised hybrids, metamodern space Buddhism or whatever. Wait metamodern space Buddhism is a joke? Haha I know it's sincere-ironic, so it's a joke but it isn't. In the end, it can only be concluded that when Vermeulen and van der Akker claimed that the years of plenty, pastiche and parataxis are over, they had spoken way too soon. One has to wonder: have they looked around recently?

<br />
{% fullwidth 'assets/img/blog/paik-1.jpeg' 'TV Garden, Nam June Paik 1974-1977' %}



## References
{% bibliography --cited %}
