---
layout: post
title: "Badiou and Intuitionism"
date: 2022-02-23 05:23:00
categories: [badiou]
published: false
---

There's so much to say about _Being and Event_, and it will take some time for it to filter through my thinking, but for now I want to focus on an interesting objection he raises to intuitionism, which I think provides a good place from which to situate him relative to others. Intuitionism is philosophical position on mathematics which rejects the law of the excluded middle (LEM), the logical law which asserts the equivalence of affirmation and double negation:

<p align="center" markdown="1"> \\( A \iff \lnot\lnot A  \\)</p>

If something isn't false then it's true, and vice versa. The mathematical significance of this apparently innocuous backstop of classical logic revolves around the key role it plays in proof by contradiction. Say you want to demonstrate the existence of a mathematical object with certain properties. A proof by contradiction would proceed as follows: first you assume that such an object does not exist, then you derive a contradiction from this assumption. Since the law of non-contradiction prohibits this conclusion, you infer (by contraposition) that the assumption must be false, i.e. that it is _not_ the case that such an object _doesn't_ exist. By the LEM, you then conclude that such an object _does_ exist.

What's wrong with this? The intuitionist’s suspicions rest on the fact that this procedure allows us to affirm the existence of things without ever having said anything about how to construct them. If we want to assert the existence of an object of a particular type, the intuitionist reckons, then we should be able to exhibit a concrete example. Proof by contradiction provides a shortcut around this criterion, and so it is rejected as illegitimate. Intuitionism is thus very tightly linked with ‘constructivism’: the idea that only those objects which can be explicitly defined in terms of formulas in a suitably formalised language can be admitted as existent.

It is impossible to convey in this post the magnitude of the philosophical stakes Badiou manages to inject into this question, but suffice to say that it is critical to his project that he find a way to reject constructivism while preserving what we might call the ‘immanent integrity’ of mathematics—which is to say, without recourse to the unbounded positing of transcendent entities which “fix a stopping point to errancy” by “organising what precedes them” {% cite badiou-bev -l 283 %}. (Intuitively, an appeal to transcendence is a bit like taking the conjunction of everything you'd like to be true and giving it a name—for example, ‘solving’ the problem of infinite regress posed by the intuition that everything has a cause by first defining God as a self-causing first mover, then asserting that such an entity must exist because that’s what would solve the problem. As I read him, Badiou’s point here is just that in rejecting constructivism one must not fall back on the vacuity of transcendence.) Characteristically, Badiou has a very elegant solution.

One of the curious things about the LEM is that it does not at all map onto the way relations of difference typically obtain between empirical concepts in everyday situations. The fact that tea is not coffee does not give us grounds to affirm that what is not tea is thereby coffee. All this really means, of course, is that to say that something is tea is to do more than to say it is not coffee, i.e. this concept has a content with more determination than its mere not-being-coffee. This content is present precisely because this is an empirical concept which picks out a particular determination of sensible intuition (i.e. it is a concept with an ‘object’). I'm probably labouring this—the point is just that the LEM holds only for a pure form of judgement abstracted from all possible contents. And indeed, this is exactly the criticism levelled at classical logic by various philosophers—Badiou mentions Hume and Hegel—namely that a logic which studies only the pure form of thought necessarily has no contact with thought in its substance.

> The one thing required to _achieve scientific progress_—and it is essential to make an effort at gaining this quite _simple_ insight into it—is the recognition of the logical principle that negation is equally positive, or that what is self-contradictory does not resolve itself into a nullity, into abstract nothingness, but essentially only into the negation of its _particular_ content; or that such a negation is not just negation, but is the _negation of the determined fact_ which is resolved, and is therefore determinate negation (Science of Logic, di Giovanni, page 33)

If the dead bones of logic are to be quickened by spirit (as Hegel puts it in the introduction to the _Science of Logic_) then a general logic must develop beyond its classical limitations to embrace thought in its determinate content, not merely in its form. Among other things, this will mean dropping the LEM.

Now Badiou does not disagree with this. However, he does find reason to treat mathematics as a special exception, and this is what distinguishes him from the intuitionist:

> My conviction on this point is that intuitionism has mistaken the route in trying to apply back onto ontology criteria of connection which _come from elsewhere_, and especially from a doctrine of mentally effective operations. In particular, intuitionism is a prisoner of the empiricist and illusory representation of mathematical _objects_. However complex a mathematical proposition may be, if it is an affirmative proposition it comes down to declaring the existence of a pure form of the multiple. All the ‘objects’ of mathematical thought—structures, relations, functions, etc—are nothing in the last instance but species of the multiple. {% cite badiou-bev -l 249 %}

Badiou is appealing here to the thesis which sets the stage for his whole enterprise: that mathematics _is_ ontology. By his lights, the intuitionist mistake is to treat mathematics as having an object, which is to say as studying some particular determination(s) of being, rather than being as such. Its consequence is that the reasonable objections to the LEM—that it does not apply in the domain of concepts with determinate contents—are unreasonably extended to mathematical concepts which strictly speaking have no such contents. As ontology, mathematics studies only the pure form of presentation of being, which from the meta-ontological standpoint of philosophy is represented in set theory, the mathematical theory of the pure multiple. (Badiou gives several reasons for privileging set theory in this way, including some ingenious philosophical ones. But most important for the present line of thought is that set theory can serve as a foundation for mathematics, in that all the subfields of mathematics can be translated into set theoretic vocabulary and derived from set theoretic axioms.)

In this view Badiou echoes Hegel:

> In mathematics, numbers have no conceptual content, no meaning outside equality or inequality, that is, outside relations which are entirely external; neither in themselves nor in connection are they a thought. When one mechanically calculates that three-fourths multiplied by two-thirds makes one-half, this operation contains about as much and as little thought as estimating whether in a logical figure this or that kind of syllogism applies. (page 32)

But whereas in this paragraph Hegel seems somewhat disparaging of mathematics, placing it alongside classical logic in the basket of empty formalisms, Badiou casts the same intuition in a more positive light by suggesting that this is exactly what we should expect, given the ontological vocation of mathematics. Mathematics may have no content, strictly speaking, but this is just because it is the study of presented being only insofar as it is abstracted from all particular contents. And this is exactly why the LEM can be affirmed in the mathematical context (against the intuitionist):

> The entire question concerning double negation […] thus comes down to knowing what it could mean to deny that a multiple—in the ontological sense—does not exist. We will agree that it is reasonable to think that this means that it exists, if it is admitted that _ontology attributes no property to multiples than existence_, because any ‘property’ is itself a multiple. We will therefore not be able to determine, ‘between’ non-existence and existence, any specific intermediary property, which would provide a foundation for the gap between the negation of non-existence and existence. {% cite badiou-bev -l 250 %}

This view marks mathematics as a certain kind of formalism (in that it is concerned only with the pure form of the multiple) but by no means as an _empty_ formalism. This is undoubtedly a neat solution, but it raises a few questions that I'd like to address now, which centre on the relationship between set theory and the rest of mathematics. As I understand Badiou's position, strictly speaking set theory is _not_ privileged in ontology, which is identified with the whole of mathematics. Set theory is privileged only from the stance of _meta_-ontology—the stance from which Badiou is writing in _Being and Event_, and which is the proper vocation of philosophy. What I do not fully understand is how much this meta-ontological privileging is held by Badiou to depend on the role set theory has played historically as a foundation for mathematics. Taken as a foundation, there's a sense in which set theory just _is_ the whole of mathematics: all the objects of study in mathematical subfields—groups, fields, functions, relations, etc—just are sets, and all theorems of these subfields are theorems of set theory. Under this aspect we can see clearly why set theory might be privileged. When, while making his case against intuitionism in the first paragraph quoted above, Badiou says that “All the ‘objects’ of mathematical thought—structures, relations, functions, etc—are nothing in the last instance but species of the multiple” he seems to appealing directly to set theory's vocation as a foundation.

If so there's an objection which could be raised at this point, closely related to a criticism often levelled at set theory by proponents of category theory (set theory's main challenger for the title of a foundation). In essence, the contention is that the way in which particular mathematical subfields are represented within set theory misses something essential about what individuates them as subfields. Consider the set \\( ST \\) of all theorems of set theory. Within this set are all the theorems not just of set theory proper, but also of all the subfields: group theory, algebraic topology, measure theory, complex analysis, and so on. But if you were to write these down on paper, they wouldn't look much they do in their native contexts: they would consist of (likely very long) formulae composed of logical symbols, quantifiers, variables, and the set theoretic symbol of belonging (\\( \in \\)). Nowhere in \\( ST \\) is there any reference to groups or to topological spaces: its theorems are _untyped_, to use an expression from computer science. And this is exactly where the objection arises: critics contend that it is precisely in the construction of types—left out by set theory—that the distinctive content belonging to each subfield resides.

This point could be put another way. It is true that within \\( ST \\) are all the theorems of group theory, but in there also are the theorems of _gloop theory_—an as yet unidentified mathematical theory of a certain kind of set with certain relations and functions defined on it, but one which has completely evaded the interest of mathematicians so far, and which has no discernible relevance to any kind of physical theory or practical application. If Badiou is right that mathematics is concerned only with the strictly ontological—being qua being, the pure form of possible presentation—then both group theory and gloop theory belong equally to this domain. It does not matter that group theory is crucial to the theoretical underpinnings of quantum mechanics while gloop theory is neither useful nor interesting—in the end they both affirm the existence of various pure forms of the multiple. Whether empty or not, formalism doesn't seem to account for what Eugene Wigner famously called “the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics.” For this, we'd need to know why it is that mathematicians study group theory rather than gloop theory—why some types link up with the world in its actuality while others seem only to express a pure form of possibility—and on this question set theory remains silent.

The category theorist’s point is essentially Kantian—Kant, of course, understood mathematical judgements to provide a paradigm case of the synthetic a priori, and so by no means saw mathematics as apiece with logic, as a kind of formalism. For Kant, mathematical knowledge consists in the construction of concepts, or types. The reason set theory is blind to this activity is that it characterises its objects—sets—only in terms of relations of belonging, and this insufficient to demarcate any particular zones of interest within \\( ST \\). In category theory, by contrast, functional relations between objects are




## Snippets

> Since in judgements and syllogisms [of classical logic] the operations are mostly reduced to, and founded upon, the quantitative aspect of the determinations, everything rests on external differentiation, on mere comparison, and becomes a completely analytical procedure and a calculus devoid of concept. (page 32)





## References
{% bibliography --cited %}
