---
layout: post
title: "Lyotard on Baudrillard"
date: 2022-02-18 05:23:00
categories: [baudrillard, lyotard, desire]
published: true
---

Some notes on a criticism of Baudrillard's symbolic exchange made by Lyotard in Libidinal Economies. The point is one that cuts to the heart of their disagreements, and responding to it (as I think it is possible to) is a a great way of getting a clearer view of Baudrillard's position. Here is Lyotard:

> We are very close and very far then from what Baudrillard is doing, and this is an excellent opportunity for us to try to explain why, since there is a movement in Baudrillard with which we feel synchronised and co-polarized. We are very close, read him and see; but also very distant, since what governs our brother's approach remains burdened in our eyes with hypothesis, theory and critique. This is not for want of denouncing critique as imperialism and theory as racism, in formulas we joyfully endorse. But as holy and beautiful as it is, his anger aims ultimately at the true once again, it reproaches political economy, even and especially if this was Marxist (because we were hoping for precisely the opposite from it), of remaining within the sphere of production, of value, of labour, and thus of forgetting something, repressing or rather foreclosing, in a sort of perversion, which Baudrillard previously qualified as fetishist, a relation between persons which would not be subordinated to the consideration of the product, but would be entirely governed by symbolic exchange, entirely centred on the exhaustion of the libidinal resources of love and death in a give-and-take heedless of the conservation of goods, heedless of power, bound up with rekindling force at all costs. Political economy, therefore, would be something which begins somewhere in the history of humanity, in any case with a certain sort of social dispositif; far then from being the universal truth of every society, presenting itself veiled, in embryo, in archaic societies from which it would be absent; it would be the retroactive projection of the capitalist assemblage onto symbolic exchanges that would ignore all interest in order to count only as passion, and all equivalence in order to exhibit nothing but ambivalence.

In essence, Lyotard is accusing Baudrillard of being tied to a model of transcendent critique which is now defunct—of trying to find some Archimedean point outside of capitalist relations from which to set up a base of resistance. Lyotard is reading Baudrillard's notion of symbolic exchange as just such a transcendent position, an unalienated zone from which to gain leverage on the system. Lyotard wants to insist, of course, that there is no such position, that leftwing praxis must give up this pretence to a transcendent viewpoint (and thus to theory, critique, even truth) and become fully committed to working with the immanent intensities of a capitalist society which has no outside. And this is a critique which bites, because Baudrillard himself _also_ explicitly rejects the transcendent position of orthodox critique. This is their common conviction—on paper at least—their shared response to the disillusionment that followed May ‘68. But Lyotard reckons that Baudrillard has not remained true to this commitment, and that the appeal to symbolic exchange (with all its problematic associations with ‘primitive’ societies) replicates the problems of orthodox Marxism.
