---
layout: post
title: "Note on Sincere Irony"
date: 2022-01-26 05:23:00
categories: [metamodernism]
published: false
---

My last attempt to engage critically with metamodernism placed focus on the motif of oscillation, because at the time it seemed to me to be an efficient way to wing a boomerang through a host of related issues without getting too bogged down in nit-picking (see [Against Metamodernism](https://samuelludford.medium.com/against-metamodernism-51be3cbbe751)). In reflection, I'd have to admit that maybe the nit-picking is unavoidable. Fielding these kind of objections always feels strangely like interacting with the managerial layer of a big institution. Anyone you speak to on a one-on-one basis is attentive and engaged—“these are some very interesting points you have raised,” they will say. But at the same time there's a sense that nothing ever lands at the level that matters, not so much because of problems in the content (if there was you'd expect overt disagreement—then we'd be getting somewhere) but because no-one actually seems to recognise the objections as addressed to them. Shares and [re-publishings](https://systems-souls-society.com/is-oscillation-the-heart-of-metamodernism-if-not-does-it-have-a-heart/) only go so far as getting your grievance pinned up on the notice board; but nothing will get done until someone actually takes ownership.

This is not intended as a moan, and there is nothing unique about this problem—these kind of dynamics are familiar across the board, recurrent in spaces where well-intentioned people come together to do intellectual work outside of traditional academia. The pattern is always the same: a small number of figures dominate the space at the broadcast level. The official self-narration is purposeful and optimistic—its all about systems change, political transformation, challenging incumbent power—but privately everyone is astonishingly cynical, with back-channel communication dense with people snarking at the public faces of the space they are supposedly a part of. It is near impossible to level meaningful criticisms when a space is structured this way, because anyone capable of hearing it will often agree with it already—the problem lies precisely in the failure of translation of private opinion into public consensus. Ultimately, you're paid 5 bucks for the laugh and everyone carries on as before. It is a remarkably efficient way of keeping a status quo in tact, and in this dynamic we can even discern a microcosm of a much wider socio-political deadlock. In many respects it is the classic bureaucratic runaround, except this time writ large and fully autopoetic.

One of the underlying points I was trying to argue in Against Metamodernism is that metamodernism—as in the actual content of this idea—implicitly necessitates and endorses these kind of dynamics. It is an agent of stagnation, not a line of flight as often assumed. That sounds like a harsh assessment, but what it does acknowledge is that metamodernism raises the right kind of questions. Whether approached through the concept of oscillation, as I did in the previous piece, or through sincere irony, as I shall do in this one, metamodernism represents an attempt not just to come up with new ideas or categories or policies or strategies, but to understand on a much deeper level the conditions of emergence of cultural novelty. In this respect it deserves engaged critics, or at any rate the questions it raises demand answers. As something of a modest attempt to fling some rocks in that direction, here I'll return to some of the nit-picking I tried to bypass in the original piece (which I was then [taken to task](https://systems-souls-society.com/is-oscillation-the-heart-of-metamodernism-if-not-does-it-have-a-heart/) on by Greg Dember, for which I am grateful) to make the case that the rise of sincere irony is not something to be welcomed.

The figures I want to think about a bit are Seth Abramson and Luke Turner, for a number of reasons. On the one hand, their own takes on metamodernism are mercifully free of the developmental psychology that has become entwined with later variants. On the other, they do not try to hold metamodernism as a purely descriptive or identifying category, and in their various ways see it as bound up with a certain call to action, or at least to the active cultivation of a sensibility. As a consequence, both figures are at risk of being obscured by recent attempts to see metamodernism as roughly divisible into Dutch and Nordic schools, since their role (both historically and conceptually) has been to act as a bridge between them. This inbetweeny character is demonstrated most vividly by Turner: in 2011 he published the [Metamodernist Manifesto](http://www.metamodernism.org/)—an unambiguous call to action—before backtracking in 2015 with [a text](http://www.metamodernism.com/2015/01/12/metamodernism-a-brief-introduction/) that explicitly disavows this former prescriptivism, instead giving metamodernism its now familiar gloss as an emerging structure of feeling. Meanwhile the LaBeouf, Rönkkö & Turner art project was gathering steam, which proceeds as if taking its cues straight from the recently wrist-slapped manifesto. Or does it? What does an artwork do, exactly? Does it try to act socially, to stage an intervention, or is it simply a moment of non-judgemental expression from those at the crest of a rising structure of feeling? Hmmm…

As is probably obvious I've never made much of the ‘structure of feeling’ vs ‘call to action’ debate, because it's always seemed to me that ‘metamodernism’ belongs to a family of terms which always do three things at once:

1. Identify an emerging trend in culture.
2. Suggest an analysis of this trend, i.e. give some account of its internal structure and how it relates to the dominant culture and its history.
3. Apply this analysis in the orientation of a project, ethic, or sensibility.

Indeed, the very fact that they allow us to do all this in the same breath is why we use these words in the first place. And to my mind, there is no-one who has tried to make something of the term ‘metamodernism’—from the most cloistered academic cultural theorist to Hanzi to whatever the fuck is going on online right now, metamodern space Buddhism or whatever—who isn't doing all three of these things. And quite right too. Some will foreground one aspect more than others, or leave certain aspects latent. You may be focused on identifying and analysing the cultural trends, with the practical orientation indicated only implicitly through enthusiasm or indifference to particular instances. Or you may be focused on rooting a political strategy in long-term historical patterns, while only implicitly indexing contemporary cultural trends. But all three dimensions always coexist at some level. As a relative outsider, I've always been struck how much similarity there is among different strands of metamodernism despite appearances of factionalism, even if this unity often shows up more at the level of practical attitudes and aesthetics than that of explicitly held commitments.

<!-- As a relative outsider I've always found the implicit alignment in the _praxis_ of metamodernists striking (however they use or position the term)—for instance the embrace of contemporary media like youtube and podcasts, including all the personal branding that comes with that, as platforms for disseminating a critique of the contemporary media environment—which then jars with all the surface-level differentiations and factionalism, obscuring both the strategic alignments and substantial disagreements. One effect of this is when someone tries to critique that underlying unity, everyone either dissolves into a thin mist or immediately starts launching into the kind of semantic hair-splitting which has more to do with terminological propriety than anything, a bit like the Democritus scholar who's still pissed off that scientists continued to use the word ‘atom’ even after they were discovered not to be indivisible. -->

But for all of that, there is at least one real ambiguity here in need of clarification, concerning the relationship between structures of feeling and cultural situations. Specifically: are structures of feeling to be understood as causes of situations or their symptoms? Can a change in situation be _driven_ by a change in the underlying structure of feeling, or does a shift in the structure of feeling only ever register a change in situation after the fact? This question is important: only if the former is true can attempting to cultivate, amplify or harness a new structure of feeling be a viable method for changing a situation. This is an ambiguity which has often been left unresolved in relation to postmodernism, was folded into the earlier attempts to theorise metamodernism, and was then inherited more or less directly by later versions. Consider this passage from Vermeulen and van der Akker's [_Notes on Metamodernism_](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.3402/jac.v2i0.5677):

> The postmodern years of plenty, pastiche, and parataxis are over. In fact, if we are to believe the many academics, critics, and pundits whose books and essays describe the decline and demise of the postmodern, they have been over for quite a while now. Some argue the postmodern has been put to an abrupt end by material events like climate change, financial crises, terror attacks, and digital revolutions. Others find that it has come to a more gradual halt by merit of less tangible developments, such as the appropriation of critique by the market and the integration of _différance_ into mass culture. And yet others point to diverging models of identity politics, ranging from global postcolonialism to queer theory. […] But if these commentators agree the postmodern condition has been abandoned, they appear
less in accord as to what to make of the state it has been abandoned for.

What is it exactly that has been abandoned? Can you really ‘abandon’ a condition? It would be easy to read in this passage the claim that there has been a reconfiguration in the deep cultural logic of our situation—in, say, the economics of intellectual and symbolic production. But read differently, the claim is that a certain set of artistic and intellectual _responses_ to this situation have been abandoned, precisely because they have been found to be inadequate to it. Is the claim really that we no longer inhabit the postmodern condition? Or is it rather that postmodernism in arts, theory and popular culture no longer provides a viable response to this condition, which has only continued to sink its fangs in deeper? Indeed, the authors’ use of the noun form (‘the postmodern’), which could refer either to the postmodern condition (as in postmodernity) or postmodernism (as in the artistic and intellectual reaction to postmodernity), seems to conspire to preserve the ambiguity.

I warned you this was going to get nit-picky—at this point it's perhaps worth illustrating in more concrete terms what is at stake in this distinction. We can do this by turning to what could be considered one of the ur-takes of metamodernism: David Foster Wallace's critique of irony. A typical gloss of this critique goes like so: in its snarky deconstruction of everything, irony never puts anything of its own on the line. I may dress as a 1980's nerd ironically to mock the very notion of a fashion or a style, but behind any apparent cleverness in this act lies a certain cowardice: all I have really done is found an efficient way to mask my own vulnerabilities. Actually, if you pay close attention to DFW's words on the subject—either in [_E Unibus Pluram_](https://jsomers.net/DFW_TV.pdf) or in TV interviews—you will see that he never quite says this. But that doesn't really matter—what's important here is the way this interpretation has served as a key rationale behind the endorsement of the metamodern sensibility, as articulated by people like Seth Abramson. The diagnosis is essentially this: that irony is too conservative, too risk averse, and this is why ultimately it can produce nothing more than a cultural stagnation. Based on this diagnosis, the path forward is clear: breaking the deadlock is a matter of recovering our capacity for vulnerability. I continue to dress as a 1980's nerd, and I continue to do so with a certain ironic awareness—it is no longer possible to be _dead serious_ about one's arbitrarily chosen signifiers in this day and age—but nevertheless I expose my own vulnerability by dialling down the snark and letting it be know that I just so happen to be really into the 1980's nerd look, and you can cringe if you dare. I have graduated from mere irony to sincere irony.

This rationale is coherent, clear, and ambitious: it identifies new currents in contemporary culture, analyses them as guided by a sensibility which breaks the postmodern deadlock, and endorses them as a line of flight from stagnation. This line of flight is considered by some on the large scale of world-historical social transformation, by others on the more local scale of preservation of interiority, and there is plenty of room for disagreement about its scope and nature. But this favourable analysis of the sincere-ironic is the glue that unifies all attempts to deploy and/or appropriate the term ‘metamodernism.’ It lies behind Vermeulen, van der Akker and Turner's identification of trends like the New Sincerity as heralding the death knell of ‘the postmodern,’ and of LaBeouf, Rönkkö & Turner and other self-consciously metamodern art projects' attempts to stage sincere-ironic interventions in a culture perceived to be paralysed. In Abramson, sincere-irony is generalised into a comprehensive media strategy—just as I do not allow the awareness that symbols and signifiers are no more than arbitrary costumes to stop me from wearing my nerd outfit in an attitude of resolved naivete, so the metamodern journalist does not allow the awareness that contemporary media spaces are compromised to stop them from [charging in regardless](https://medium.com/@Seth_Abramson/on-metamodernism-926fdc55bd6a).

Another variation on this sincere-ironic media strategy is found in the Hanzi Freinacht project, which uses a gimmicky artificial persona to smuggle an earnest political message into a marketplace of ideas which systematically skews towards gimmicky artificiality. And as for the content of this political message—well, the cultural theorist still lingering near the beginning of this chain may grumble that metamodernism has been conflated with Integral and all that. But the question must still be asked why it is that metamodernism has proven so ripe for integration into the podcast ecology of transformational politics and digital spiritualism, complete with all the cloying personalities and commingling of DNA that comes with that? (Have you ever seen a Youtube channel devoted to Foucauldian spirituality? Neither have I.) The answer is staring us in the face: active participation in these media ecologies is flat with the spirit of sincere-irony. The metamodern cultural theorist can't really criticise the metamodern space Buddhist on their podcast praxis—their cultural endorsements deprive them of the intellectual resources to do this—so all they can do is quibble the semantics and propriety of the terminology, leaving them in a position akin to the hardcore Democritus scholar who is still pissed off that scientists kept using the word ‘atom’ even after they were found to be splittable.  

But let’s return to the critique of irony, as presented above. On this account, irony is understood as a _cause_ of stagnation. It is the ironic structure of feeling characteristic of postmodernism which generates a cultural situation marked by inertia. Let us call the claim that structures of feeling are productive of cultural situations _psychologism_. Psychologism is what is needed to make good on the idea that the cultivation of a metamodern sensibility can change our cultural situation. Psychologism is not the sort of position held explicitly, and more often than not the question just doesn't come up. But it is fair to say that the treatment of irony and postmodernism has often been psychologistic in the literature on metamodernism, or at least ambiguous enough to lend itself to a psychologistic reading. But this needn't be so. It would be perfectly possible to identify the rise of sincere-irony, even endorse it as a positive development, while still reading it strictly as a symptom of a deeper shift in the social configuration which cannot be harnessed through intervention. Indeed, my suspicion is that this point cuts much closer to the real reason cultural theorists working on metamodernism have been cagey about endorsing sincere-ironic political projects. However, if we explicitly reject psychologism then this has some downstream implications which cast a more suspicious light on sincere-irony. This is the thread I want to take up here. Let's call _structuralism_ the claim that situations are productive of structures of feeling, rather than vice versa. The structuralist reading has it that the ironic mood distinctive of postmodernism is a symptom of cultural stagnation, not its cause—for that we must look elsewhere.

What is a situation? Here it is useful to consider the notion of a ‘cultural logic,’ as popularised by Fredric Jameson in his naming of postmodernism as the cultural logic of late capitalism. Often all these terms get mixed up together, so that postmodern irony is variously referred to as a sensibility or a structure of feeling or a cultural logic, as if these were synonyms. But irony is not a cultural logic. For a better representative of this notion, we'd do better to turn to a specimen like ‘all publicity is good publicity.’ This phrase denotes neither a sensibility nor a structure of feeling, but something more like a law: a principle that governs the aggregation and distribution of value in the contemporary public sphere. This comes much closer to what is meant by a cultural logic, which indicates the real structure of the symbolic economy definitive of a socio-historical situation. With this our question becomes: is an ironic structure of feeling the product of a stagnant cultural logic, or is a stagnant cultural logic the product of an ironic structure of feeling? Does postmodernity produce postmodernism or does postmodernism produce postmodernity?

When put like that, it seems obvious that it must be the former: surely postmodernism is a reaction to postmodernity? This is certainly the historically consistent way of looking at it: modernism in the arts was primarily a reaction to modernity. Surrealism, for instance, was a deliberate attempt to muster the resources of the unconscious in an assault on bourgeois complacency. When surrealist techniques once thought to be revolutionary were assimilated by advertising and marketing in the post-war period, this indicated the arrival of a new, postmodern cultural logic, and postmodernism arose as reaction to this new configuration of the symbolic economy, to which modernist methods were no longer adequate. In this respect, the idea that metamodernism might be something to cultivate in order to _bring about_ metamodernity—a new cultural logic to replace the postmodern one—is a peculiar, historically anomalous idea. Or perhaps metamodernism simply registers the symptoms of a new cultural logic, which has already emerged by itself? In which case great, there's nothing to do. But then doesn't an endorsement of metamodernism just amount to a celebration of the status quo? This problem is [sometimes addressed](https://medium.com/the-abs-tract-organization/the-hypermodern-highway-to-hell-1d3a6441b540) by positing a bifurcation—the postmodern cultural logic, it is argued, has now bifurcated into two child logics—metamodern and hypermodern—which are distinct from it and now competing for dominance. This helps to square the historical sense that shifts in logic precede shifts in symptoms with the political sense that there are urgent practical lessons to be drawn from the symptoms. How might this suggestion be assessed? Well, first we need to get a handle on the _content_ of these cultural logics, so that comparison can be made. My stance is that there has been no such bifurcation—my argument will be that the appearance of continual bifurcation is precisely what we should expect from the postmodern cultural logic. But first we need to know what this logic actually is, and we can find our way into that tangle by considering a structuralist response to the psychologist critique of irony.





<!-- This in part due to having a better sense of how the contemporary online version of metamodernism and its adjacent spaces are actually structured.

‘Adjacent spaces’ should be a horribly vague term, but curiously in this case it is perfectly clear. We know exactly what it refers to—the aesthetics, ways of speaking and platform ecologies that unite these ‘meta’ spaces are instantly recognisable, and this points to a deep kernel of implicit alignment among them. In contrast, those with visibility within these spaces are often in the business of differentiating themselves from the rest of the crowd (they have to be, or they wouldn't be visible). The result is that what unites remains implicit and shadowy, whereas what happens at the level of explicit content is something like a perpetual reframing of old points into new vocabularies, each with just enough non-essential variation to fund a tour of podcast appearances providing caveats, clarifications and translations. Even when it comes to referring to itself, the multiplicity of possibilities keeps growing—meta-sphere, sense-making web, liminal web. Whenever a substantial disagreement does arise, it is more often treated as a new opportunity for differentiation (a new prefix is added, some new branding deployed—a moment traditionally announced by a pointless etymological digression) than a dispute to be resolved under the aegis of the original signifier. The official line is mediation; the reality is bifurcation.

That's a bit harsh, admittedly. But it's worth saying that insofar as this does describe some of the dynamics of these spaces, they are by no means unique to them. Indeed, these patterns seem to recur wherever well-intentioned people try to come together to do intellectual work outside of traditional academia. The story always goes something like this:  -->
