---
layout: post
title: "Gap Yah Garage"
date: 2022-12-11 05:23:00
categories: [subculture, value, zizek]
published: true
---

While browsing for music yesterday I came across a blurb for the new Objekt record which begins, “Arriving in a vein of streamlined, technofied reductions of the dancehall meter explored by likes of Livity Sound, Rhyw, Simo Cell and more, ‘Objekt #5’ sees Objekt keep abreast of prevailing currents after everyone, including him, got a bit bored of the same electro and gap yah garage beats prior to the pandemic.” This is not the first time I've encountered this complaint about ‘gap yah garage,’ and anyone who's been paying attention to electronic music in the UK will be familiar with its target: a slick and stripped back modern iteration of UK garage, spearheaded by a certain group of white university kids, undoubtedly talented but coming from somewhere very different to the working class and racially diverse London rave scene of the 1990's in which the genre has its origins. While the targets of this complaint are often left unnamed, it is clear that at the bullseye lies the likes of Hessle Audio and its roster:

{% include youtube.html id="PBSKkPXg93E" %}

What actually is the complaint here? It can't just be that the same music is somehow rendered boring just by virtue of being made by someone different; the contention must surely be that there is some kind of vital essence or authenticity imbued in the original form by the social milieu it comes from that has been lost in the modern version. If this complaint is to be a meaningful one, this is a loss which must be recognisable in the music itself. In this post I want to offer a brief reflection on what that vital essence might be. This is a question I think goes far beyond simple class or racial agitation (though there are good reasons why it is expressed this way)—it gets at the heart of how different positions within a social structure construct different standards of authenticity or quality. In this respect, both the development of these trends and the reaction against them contain coded information the value structure of society as a whole.

Let me state my thesis up front: what goes missing in the gap yah garage are precisely those elements of the original form that reference its position within a fundamentally _participatory_ culture. The reason for this is that gap yah garage, unlike its predecessor, is not addressed to a participant in a concrete subculture at all—rather it is addressed to the universal standpoint, to the critic who stands outside culture and assesses it from the position of an observer. There is a very good reason why this music is often accused of being boring but is rarely accused of being bad. By all accounts it is well-constructed, subtle, clever. But it is as if there's a kind of ‘objective quality’ to it which has been bought at the price of something we might label ‘subjective quality.’[^1] This is a trade-off that speaks to the contrast between standpoints: where the value the critic derives is a purely aesthetic value, for a participant the aesthetic experience is always preceded by and entangled with a distinctive kind of social value, not dissimilar to the value one derives from playing a game. When the music is produced _for_ the critical standpoint all energies are necessarily redirected into aesthetic refinement, sidelining those elements bound up with its participatory function. The music loses its soul not because it has deteriorated at an aesthetic level, but for precisely the opposite reason—instead it is the imposition of a demand to optimise for the aesthetic standpoint that ensures all other elements are stripped away.

Let's try to make this more concrete. If you take more or less any classic track from the early garage years, the elements absent in the newer forms are immediately noticeable:

{% include youtube.html id="ZP2c8H34G1s" %}

Bells, whistles, RnB hooks, laser zaps, marching basslines, the ubiquitous presence of the MC. Even where gap yah garage does include these elements, it gives them treatment far more deliberate, sparse, and self-conscious, ‘quoting’ them in a manner that borders on the ironic. These are the elements that place UK garage in a continuity with dancehall, and perhaps even even with those traditional African forms in which music is conceived less as an aesthetic experience one passively receives and evaluates, than as a huge call-and-response game which one is—whether as a listener, dancer, or musician—involved in as a player. These elements make no effort to be unique or subtle, and indeed this would conflict with their function as ‘pieces on the board’—a role which requires them to be immediately transparent to and recognisable by all. The kind of remix culture native to hip-hop, garage, and jungle, in which the same loops are recycled over and over again, the same little sounds haunting dancefloors for decades—a practice which has nothing but middle fingers for the bourgeois demand for originality—can be seen as an extension of this attitude, which treats music as a participatory game before it treats it as an aesthetic experience.  

Put this way, we can see why this conflict between the participatory and the aesthetic is truly a conflict, as opposed to a mere difference. There is a counterpoint to the complaint that gap yah garage is boring, namely that earlier forms are somehow tacky or kitsch. This is a complaint that is rarely vocalised, but operates more as a background structure giving shape to the forces that result in things like gap yah garage in the first place—it is not a stretch to say that the overriding
imperative in those domains of culture which optimise for originality, stripped back maturity, subtlely, and the like, is the elimination of all kitsch (this could equally be said of much of the contemporary, predominantly white techno scene, for instance). My claim is that the ‘kistchy’ elements are simply those elements representative of the participatory nature of a musical form, just seen from a standpoint outside the context of participation. In those kitsch-averse areas of culture it is common to encounter an attitude which is extremely dismissive of things like jungle and garage, especially in their unsanitised forms, which always seems to carry a vaguely racist undertone. The reason is, I think, simply that it is primarily through black music (particularly via the West Indies) that essentially participatory forms of music have found their way into the mainline of UK dance music, where they now face scrutiny from a bourgeois critical standpoint which dismisses as kitsch any participatory form which has not been stripped of its nature, turned inside out to be made available to the universal observer as an aesthetic object.

## Notes

[^1]: This distinction between subject and objective quality is very similar to a distinction Žižek makes between subject and objective realism in his [discussion of The Wire](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fsf4rAGlR5s&t=4608s&ab_channel=Emporium), which the points I have been making here owes much to.
