---
layout: post
title: "Incomplete Nature Notes 1"
date: 2023-02-20 05:23:00
categories: []
published: false
---

I've recently started reading Terrence Deacon's _Incomplete Nature_. This book belongs in a steadily swelling genre of attempts to naturalise those phenomena distinctive of organic life and mind which don't fit neatly into scientific image of the world—phenomena such as teleology, intentionality, normativity, phenomenality, meaning, and function. Deacon claims to offer a reading of these concepts which retains broadly materialist commitments without falling into the eliminativism that many argue such readings must fall. Or as Deacon puts it, he aims to explain them without explaining them away.

What is perhaps unique about Deacon's approach is that he aims to account for these diverse phenomena in a single breath—collectively labelling them 'ententional' phenonema, he argues that what characterises all of them is their 'absential' features, or their intrinsic relationship to something absent. An intentional state is a state with a content, and as such is essentially constituted by its relationship to something which it isn't—in the case of a fictional content this may be a relationship to something with no presence in the world at all. Similarly, the end-directedness distinctive of teleological phenomena are defined through a relationship to an unactualised possibility. While we might wonder whether this notion of constitutive absence can exhaust the diversity of ententional phenomena, this strikes me a very promising starting point. Framed this way it becomes the problem of accounting for how a new type of causality—one that can look suspiciously like backwards causality—can arise from 'normal' (or in Aristotelean terms, efficient) causality. 

I'm a few chapters in now, and one thing that stands out is how much repetition there is in Deacon's writing. For this reason I won't attempt any kind of chapter-by-chapter analysis—instead I'll just pull out key points in his argument. I'll begin this task in the next post; for the rest of this one I'd like to dwell on the theme of constitutive absence, and to hash out some of my own intuitions on this problem and how it relates to other themes on this blog.

One first thing to note is that constitutive absence has been a recurring theme in French struturalist and poststructuralist thought. We might think here of the Derridean notion of hauntology or Deleuzian preoccupations with the agency of the virtual. It is a central Lacanian idea that signifying processes are essentially organised around lack or rupture. I have [argued]({{site.baseurl}}/2022/01/03/baudrillard-subject.html#12-simulation-and-reality) that Baudrillard's concept of simulation can be understood in similar terms as the causality of illusion. The prevalence of this idea among these thinkers can perhaps be explained by their concern for political and cultural phenomena, and their correlated need to provide an account of social causality, or the manner in which our collective expectations of the future influence the present. In this respect they share an affinity with decision theoretic phenomena like prisoner's dilemmas, in which the possibility of mutual defection understood by participants is a sufficient condition of its actualisation. 

In many respects the prisoner's dilemma is a paradigm example of an absential phenomena in the social context, not least because its mechanism is so transparent. However, our formulation of this dilemma and similar scenarios depends on our ability to help ourselves to discursive agents with a capacity to represent and reason about outcomes and each other. It therefore explains an absential relationship only by reference to prior absential relationships. In this sense it doesn't help with what we might call the problem of 'original' ententionality, or how ententional phenomena first arose in a world devoid of them. 

This thought illustrates what Deacon identifies as the main pitfall of most attempts to reckon with ententionality, namely that they often end up 'explaining' the target phenomenon only by implicitly appealing to some prior notion of ententionality reinserted into the theory in a cryptic form, thus failing provide an explanation at all. This 'homunculus' problem is not one that besets only materialist accounts. As an example Deacon mentions Whiteheadian panspsychism, which both admonishes materialism for what it takes to be its implicit commitment to eliminativism and claims that this fate can be avoided by adopting a process ontology consisting of prehensions and actual occasions. But as Deacon points out, in this ontology prehension ends up serving as something like a minimal unit of ententionality, and in this sense relabels rather than explains it (I made a similar point in a [discussion]({{site.baseurl}}/2022/02/23/panexperientialism.html) of Whitehead that prehension functions as a _virtus dormitiva_). If I give you a little bit of ententionality you may be able to give me back a lot, but you will not thereby have touched the problem of original ententionality. Deacon also makes the point that even eliminativist theories seem to suffer from their own version of the homunculus fallacy, as it is not possible to make sense of an complete, purely physical description of the world without implicitly positing a kind of universal interpreter located at an Archimedean view-from-nowhere. 

All this goes to show that the homunculus fallacy is incredibly robust across different approaches to ententional phenomena, and in this respect may even provide a clue to the nature of ententionality itself. It has often been pointed out that mental phenomena in particular have a kind of circularity or reflexively built into them, a quality indicated in Douglas Hofstader's famous comment that the mind is constituted by a 'strange loop', and prefigured in German Idealism (as in Fichte's notion of the self-positing subject, or the related Hegelian idea that self-consciousness is an artifact of its own configuring concept). Getting to the bottom of this strange reflexivity is a strikingly difficult task, but it does seem to me to be the right task. In this respect the philosophical puzzles related to the mind have never seemed to me to have much to do with questions of deep ontology, but rather stem from the inherently paradoxical nature of mental phenomena considered as such. This is perhaps why I feel so unimpressed with contemporary panpsychism, which explicitly positions itself relative to what it sees as deficiencies in materialist ontologies which give rise to the mind-body problem. My feeling is that even if we had compelling reasons to adopt a panpsychist ontology, Whiteheadian or otherwise, this would give us exactly zero new insight into the nature of the mind. 

Another person who has been accused of a version of the homunculus fallacy is Robert Brandom. To cut a long story short, on his account intentionality is to be naturalised in terms of normative attitude implicit in social practices. This move risks circularity: if normative attitudes cannot be understood without reference to their intentional contents then the account is rendered unilluminating—another case of "if you give me a little bit of intentionality I'll give you a lot." Brandom himself recognises the problem, maintaining that his appeal to normative attitudes does not help itself to any tacit intentionality. But critics have made the case that this implausible, arguing that no amount of physical (or causal, or dispositional) criteria can ever be enough to specify the content of a norm, typically via an appeal to the rule-following paradox. 

This so-called 'norm-grounding problem' sheds light on a general problem for efforts to naturalise ententionality, which Deacon collects under the heading of 'multiple realisation'—the idea that any given ententional state could be realised by many different physical states. This inherent underdetermination of the ententional by the physical seems to preclude the possibility of identifying any ententional state with any physical state, and for its critics this puts heed to the idea that ententionality could ever be explained as arising from the non-ententional physical. Another verison of this point can be found in Jerry Fodor's critique of Darwinism, which argues that natural selection cannot have produced mental states with determinate contents. He argues that since natural selection is essentially a filter rather than a claw which lifts traits up from above—which is to say it selects _against_ maladaptive traits rather than selects _for_ adaptive ones—it can't distinguish between intentional states with distinct content so long as they cause the same behavioural outcomes (the example )
