---
layout: post
title: "No Intrinsic Content"
date: 2024-01-02 05:23:00
categories: []
published: false
---

I've been finding my way back into philosophy lately after something of a hiatus, and as often happens in this situation my oldest and most unscratchable itch has returned: I once again feel compelled to try to say something about consciousness. In this case some reflections on how illusionism might be improved were crystallised by this [rather engaging conversation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xq9u6erSF24&ab_channel=DustinCrummett) between philosophers Ralph Stefan Weir and Dustin Crummett on the topic of substance dualism. Unlike Weir I do not endorse this view, but nevertheless I found much to agree with in his line of thought, particularly in his suggestion that the premises shared by property dualism and panpsychism also provide reasons to accept the more controversial substance dualism. I think this insight offers a particularly clear view of what's really going on in this debate, and I'll return to it later in the post when I formulate my own version of this argument. But I'd like to begin by exploring some of Weir's critical comments on the version of physicalism to which I do subscribe. This is what Crummett introduces as 'deflationary' physicalism, defined by its attempt to reject those characterisations of consciousness in terms of concepts like phenomenal properties or qualia that render it problematic from a physicalist perspective.  

I've written about deflationary physicalism a few times on this blog, most recently in [a post on Whitehead's panexperientialism]({{site.baseurl}}/2022/02/23/panexperientialism.html). It is a family of views encompassing the illusionism of Frankish as well as the positions of Dennett and Rorty, arguably those of Davidson and arguably those of Wittgenstein. It is distinguished both from more common varieties of what is sometimes called type-b physicalism, which accept the existence of phenomenal properties on more or the less the terms that property dualists and panpsychists do (while still insisting that they have a physical basis), and from strong forms of eliminativism which flatly deny the existence of consciousness in even a pre-theoretical sense. The deflationary physicalist thus attempts to deny that there is a hard problem of consciousness without denying the existence of consciousness itself. Their task is to say what exactly it is that they are denying and why they deny it. One thing that jumps out at me every time I return to this debate—and perhaps explains the persistence of this itch—is that those of us who hold this view have not yet done nearly a good enough job of convincing the world that this task can be met.

Weir's dismissal of this view is a case in point. He argues that deflationary physicalism tends to get stuck oscillating between the two views it tries to distinguish itself from—eliminativism on one side and type-b physicalism on the other—and that this suggests the view itself doesn't admit a coherent articulation. We can see this oscillation at work by thinking about a quick objection to illusionism, which holds both that there are no phenomenal properties and that it seems to us that there are. Problems are not far to seek—after all, isn't this adjective 'phemomenal' supposed to pick out precisely that class of entities for whom seeming is tantamount to being? In the same way that it is difficult to envisage a hallucinated pain that doesn't hurt, so it is difficult to see how we could talk about an illusion of phenomenal properties without also committing to the existence of phenomenal properties themselves. Putting the point another way, an illusion is identified as an illusion in virtue of its content: that white square may look grey, but it is precisely the fact that it looks _some way_—that there is something it is like to look at it that is different from how it looks in normal conditions—that allows us to say that there is any illusion at all. Presented this way the illusionist position looks incoherent, and resolving the inconsistency would seem to push in the direction of either eliminativism about consciousness or realism about phenomenal properties. 

I tend to think that this is a pretty good argument against illusionism, and is why I do not believe that cognitive illusion is a particularly promising tool for articulating a deflationary position. I think we need to say that neither are there phenomenal properties nor does there seem to be. If we are still to affirm that consciousness exists—that there is something it is like to look at a sunset or hear a UK garage banger—then we will have to interpret this pre-theoretical notion without appeal to phenomenal properties at all. From a certain perspective what I've just said may seem close to logical inconsistency, given that phenomenal properties and what-it's-likeness are often treated as synonyms. However, I think it's very possible to break this synonymy and give this claim a reading which is coherent, substantial and well-motivated. Clearly, there is no synonymy if what-it's-likeness is understood as referring to consciousness in an ostensive sense—meaning roughly "that thing that happens when your not in a coma or dreamless sleep"—while the concepts of phenomenal properties, qualia etc. are understood as being characterised by an essential feature. The claim then amounts to a denial that consciouness in the ostensive sense of what-it's-likeness possesses the feature taken to be characteristic of phenomenal properties. But what is this property? I think the relevant property is intrinsic contentfulness. Denying that conscious experience has intrinsic content is what the deflationary physicalist needs to do to prise consciousness away from the purported feature of it that concepts like qualia and phenomenal properties will have to capture if they're to underwrite a hard problem of consciousness. 

The rest of this post will be devoted to unpacking this claim. This will involve several things. First is to talk a bit about what it means to deny that our conscious experiences have intrinsic content, and to get a handle on the intuition behind this. Second is to consider some reasons why we might deny intrinsic content. In particular I'll emphasise that our strongest reasons derive not from big-picture concerns about scientific materialism or causal closure, but from phenomenological reflection. Third is to argue that consciousness having intrinsic content is indeed what is required to underwrite a hard problem of consciousness—indeed, I'll argue (with Weir) that anyone who accepts the intrinsic contentfulness of consciousness should endorse substance dualism (this includes all you type-b physicalists, sorry). Conversely, without intrinsic content there is no hard problem. Finally I'll consider why, given that consciousness has no intrinsic content, the intuition that it does remains so robust.

A brief clarification before getting into the main argument. Concepts like phenomenal properties or qualia are not always seen to be defined by intrinsic contentfulness, and are sometimes used in the ostensive sense. However, the point will be to argue that if this the case then they do not support a hard problem and the deflationary physicalist can just admit them. If they are to support the kind of inferences that problematise consciousness for physicalists, then they will have to be characterised as picking out the _intrinsic_ content of consciousness. But this way of characterising these concepts does not secure the existence of their referent in the way that ostensive definition would, and so on this characterisation it is perfectly coherent to deny their existence. I won't labour this point as I have done so many times in the past, but note it to indicate a pitfall—widespread vacillation between ostensive and intensional characterisations of consciousness is one of the main reasons why, from my perspective, the deflationary position has so often been misunderstood.

## 1. What is it like to hear a C major chord?

I'd like to begin by considering a few examples from music that illustrate what it might mean to say that consciousness lacks intrinsic content. When we ask what it is like to hear a C major chord, it is tempting to think that this question must have an answer. Yet there is an important sense in which it does not, because what this chord sounds like will depend on the musical context in which it appears. In the key of C major, the the C major chord is the tonic chord and will feel like home. In the key of F major a C major chord will sound unstable, 'pulling' back to the tonic. This dependence on context speaks to an inherently relational quality to musical perception which is notable in that it tends to _surprise_ us when we first learn about it. It is a real head scratcher to learn that the notes in an E minor scale are exactly those in a G major scale, despite the fact that G major and E minor have totally different tonal qualities. The fact that makes sense of this—that what we are hearing is not notes but rather the relationships between notes, which depend on where you start and finish—conflicts with a musically naive intuition we have that there should be some way that a note sounds in itself.

To say that consciousness lacks intrinsic content is to say that this relational or context-dependent quality of what-it's-likeness generalises to all conscious experiences. There is nothing it is like to experience anything _in itself_—the content of what it is like to experience something is always fixed only relative to what it experientially differentiates itself from. That is the claim, at least. In the post my aim is not so much to provide strong reasons for believing this claim as to establish that it is coherent and at least _prima facie_ reasonable, and to show how it has bearing on the hard problem. That it is coherent and reasonable is, I believe, established by the fact that we already know what it feels like to discover that what seemed to be an intrinsic content is in fact relational. The musical example is striking, but there are many other examples of cognitive illusions that illustrate the same point. One was alluded to earlier, in which two squares of pixels with exactly the same greyscale value are perceived to have quite different shades of grey depending on what surrounds them. 

I think it is significant that carefully constructed perceptual scenarios like these are able to draw out aspects of our phenomenology that seem to contradict our intuitions about how it _should_ work. I'll return to this point towards the end of this post. For now, the aim is just to state an intuitively plausible version of the deflationary thesis. But at this point, it may not be at all clear what any of this has to do with the hard problem. Why would it matter that what-it's-likeness attaches to musical functions-in-context rather than particular chords, or that what it's like to look at a square of pixels depends on what surrounds it? Surely the hardness of the problem derives only from the fact that there is something it is like to have these experiences at all? To answer these questions I'll consider some of the arguments designed to locate the content of the hard problem. 

## 2. The inverted spectrum argument against functionalism